European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294
www.elsevier.com/locate/dsw

Electronic marketplaces: A literature review and a call
for supply chain management research
Martin Grieger
Department of Operations Management, Copenhagen Business School, DK-2000 Frederiksberg, Denmark

Abstract
These days, Internet-based electronic marketplaces (EMs) are getting more and more popular. They emerge in
diﬀerent industries, supporting the exchange of goods and services of diﬀerent kinds, with and for diﬀerent types of
actors, and are following diﬀerent architectural principles. Most observers have assumed that EM would come to
dominate the e-business landscape. Once you look beyond the publicity, however, you quickly see that most EMs are
struggling. The supply chain dimension of an EM is largely neglected and poorly managed, while basic logistics operation is currently hampering turnover and revenues. The Paper at hand examines, based on a critical literature review,
the actual EM discussion and calls for more supply chain management research within this ﬁeld.
 2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Supply chain management; Electronic marketplaces; Electronic business; Relationships; Electronic commerce; Information
technology

1. Introduction
The world of business is being changed to an
e-economy by new forces global competition, increased information availability, educated consumers, changing relationships, rapid innovations,
and increasingly complex products. No industry is
left untouched. In todayÕs customer-focused marketplace, supply chain management has become a
key to competitive advantage. But having accepted
the challenge to create a synchronised supply chain
that can compete in the future e-economy, what
concrete capabilities must then be mastered? We
see an increase in the number and functionality of
business models that use information systems that
cross organisational boundaries, such as systems
E-mail address: mg.om@cbs.dk (M. Grieger).

linking one or more ﬁrms with customers and/or
suppliers. New business models emerge or old
business models improve and experience a renaissance. But they all have a very short history and
still have to prove their proﬁtability and function.
So why not instead ask the question: Which competencies must a business model, using the Internet
medium, manage amidst a competition regarding
‘‘supply chain versus supply chain’’? One of these
business models is an ‘‘Internet-based B2B electronic marketplace’’ (EM), which this paper is dealing with.

2. Methodology
This paper provides a survey of the EM discussion and presents an EM deﬁnition (Section 3).

0377-2217/03/$ - see front matter  2002 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S 0 3 7 7 - 2 2 1 7 ( 0 2 ) 0 0 3 9 4 - 6

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294

Next, the paper exposes the importance of supply
chain management within EMs (Section 4). In
Section 5 the relevancy of supply chain management for an EM is analysed by examining the type
of relationship within diﬀerent EM categories.
A standard literature review was conducted
along with a key word search of the World Wide
Web. The investigation included international
journals as well as reports from smaller journals,
conference papers and the ‘‘grey’’ literature (i.e.,
popular articles, unpublished reports and other
documents, and some Internet (non-journal)
materials). First, relevant keywords, such as
‘‘electronic marketplace’’, ‘‘electronic SCM’’,
‘‘electronic exchange’’, and ‘‘electronic auction’’
were deﬁned. Then, a search in electronic scientiﬁc
databases, internet portals and websites of relevant
consultant and research ﬁrms was conducted;
various search engines were used (see Appendix A
for a description of the methodological approach
to the search process).

3. Introducing electronic marketplaces
3.1. The jargon jungle and the problem of understanding electronic marketplaces
E-commerce can be take place among businesses (B2B) or between businesses and consumers
(B2C) but the Internet also encompasses a wider
spectrum of potential commercial activities and
information exchanges and chances for an EM
intermediary (see Fig. 1). Many of these EMs have
been established on the Internet since the middle
of 1999. The Economist estimates that there were
already over 750 EMs in existence in the ﬁrst
quarter of 2000 (The Economist, 2000).
The EM concept, however, dates back to mid
1940s when the ﬁrst documented EM system,
known as Selevision, was used to remote-market
Florida citrus fruit (Henderson, 1984). Real developments in EMs, however, only started in the
late 1970s when the ﬁrst computer-based EM pilot
project was initiated (McCoy and Sarhan, 1988).
During its history, the core function of the EM
facilitating trading transactions for buyers and/or
sellers––has remained. It seems that only innova-

281

Fig. 1. Internet applications (Coppel, 2000).

tion has been the medium underlying the market
mechanism, which has been developed from analogue telephone systems to digital computer networks.
As new entrants with new business models pour
into the B2B space, it is increasingly diﬃcult to
make sense of the new EM landscape. Due to the
new technology of Internet technology, EMs became more and more interesting for both researchers and practitioners because the limiting
factors of time and space seem to have been overcome by the new medium. Via the Internet, EMs
are ubiquitous and available 24 hours a day (Schmid, 1993; Weber, 1993). They seem to be more
‘‘just’’ and ‘‘self-ruled’’ as well as more competitive
and decentralised (Himberger et al., 1991; Malone
et al., 1987). Following these arguments, EMs
could be considered manifestations of the neoclassical market ideal, reducing transaction costs to
a negligible minimum (Schmid, 1993; Bakos, 1991).
New EM viewpoints have grown and its research is
popular in a range of disciplines, though deﬁnitions
are varying, attributes and characteristics seem to
be innumerable and used arbitrarily (see Table 1).
Is an EM an interorganisational information
system (Bakos, 1991), an electronic procurement
solution (Segev et al., 1999), a medium (Schmid
et al., 1998), a meeting point (Kaplan and Sawhney, 2000), an intermediary (Dai and Kauﬀman,
2000) or just a listing (Bradley and Peters, 1997)?
Beyond that, some authors argue for special attributes such as virtual (Segev et al., 1999), digital
(Dai and Kauﬀman, 2000), public (Ariba, 2000;

282

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294

Table 1
Selected EM deﬁnitions
Author (s)

Selected EM deﬁnitions

McCoy and
Sarhan (1988)

‘‘An EM separates the negotiating function from the physical transfer of the product or commodity in which the
market trades. It can manage buyersÕ and sellersÕ oﬀers and bids, as well as moving products directly from sellers
to buyers. The system is open to all buyers and sellers, regardless of their location and can provide instant market
information to all traders’’
‘‘. . .is an interorganisational information system that allows the participating buyer and sellers to exchange
information about prices and product oﬀerings’’
‘‘. . . can be viewed as a public listing of products and their attributes from all suppliers in an industry segment,
and available to all potential buyers’’
‘‘. . . facilitating the exchange of information, goods, services, and payments. In the process, they create economic
value for buyers, sellers, market intermediaries, and for society at large’’
‘‘. . . is a media which foster market based exchanges between agents in all transaction phases’’

Bakos (1991)
Bradley and
Peters (1997)
Bakos (1998)
Schmid et al.
(1998)
Segev et al.
(1999)
Dai and Kauﬀman (2000)
Mueller (2000)
Ariba (2000)

Kaplan and
Sawhney (2000)
Lipis et al.
(2000)

‘‘Compared to many other electronic procurement solutions, EMs represent a relatively neutral position between
buyer and seller, providing services to both sides of a transaction. An EM represents a virtual place where buyers
and sellers meet to exchange goods and services’’
‘‘. . . function as digital intermediaries that focus on industry verticals or speciﬁc business functions. They set up
marketplaces where ﬁrms participate in buying and selling activities after they obtain membership’’
‘‘Electronic markets allow buyers and sellers to exchange information about product oﬀerings and prices bid and
asked’’
‘‘. . . are commerce sites on the public Internet that allow large communities of buyers and suppliers to ‘‘meet’’ and
trade with each other. They present ideal structures for commercial exchange, achieving new levels of market
eﬃciency by tightening and automating the relationship between supplier and buyer’’
‘‘. . . is a meeting-point where suppliers and buyers can interact online’’
‘‘. . . is an Internet-based solution that links businesses interested in buying and selling related goods or services
from one another. It can be distinguished from a procurement or distribution system insofar as it must be neutral,
taking into account the interests of both buyers and sellers in its governance’’

Bradley and Peters, 1997), neutral (Segev et al.,
1999), or open (McCoy and Sarhan, 1988). These
examples show that the vocabulary, which is
used to describe this new area of business, is under
establishment. Within the ‘‘e-hub name game’’
(Obrecht, 2000) the name EM barely prevails
against other terms and concepts like B2B marketplaces, e-hubs, e-markets, exchanges, auctions,
portals seem to overlap and mean diﬀerent things
to diﬀerent people. In the following section an
attempt is made to set out a clear deﬁnition of
an EM.
3.2. An electronic marketplace deﬁnition
A marketplace as a historically evolved institution allows customers and suppliers to meet at a
certain place and at a certain time in order to
communicate and to announce buying or selling
intentions, which eventually match and may be

settled. Today the institution market still does the
same, but has occasionally been remodelled due to
the evolution of media. However, owing to the
evolution of modern information and (tele-) communication technology, time and space restrictions
have been weakened and the cyberspace has become the new meeting point.
The unique feature of an EM is that it brings
multiple buyers and sellers together (in a ‘‘virtual’’
sense) in one central market space. If it also enables them to buy and sell from each other at a
dynamic price which is determined in accordance
with the rules of the exchange, called an electronic
exchange; otherwise it is called a portal. The important point, which diﬀerentiates an exchange
from other B2B e-commerce companies, is that an
exchange involves multiple buyers and sellers and
it centralises and matches buy and sell orders and
provides post-trade information. One should
compare this with the e-procurement process of

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294

one company, say General Motors, which sets up a
web site with an auction process for suppliers to
bid on contracts with General Motors. This is not
an EM––because there is only one buyer. Similarly, a business that oﬀers goods or services for
sale to other businesses, over the Internet, is not an
EM even if it provides a price-setting mechanism
that is normally associated with an EM, such as
an auction––because there is only one seller.
To summarise these thoughts and show diﬀerent views (Schmid, 1999), an EM could be deﬁned
as
(a) institutional––as a medium
• that assigns diﬀerent roles within a community, primarily buyers and suppliers, but also
other roles like logistics service providers,
banks, and other intermediaries;
• that facilitate the exchange of information,
goods, services, and payments;
• that provide an infrastructure––deﬁne protocols and processes that rule the inter action within the community, and also
provide a common language.
(b) social––as a community consisting of buyers,
sellers, etc.
• which could be described by a certain
condition, which includes the participantsÕ
knowledge, intention, contracts (assets and
liabilities) and goods, at a certain time;
• with roles involving rights and duties;
• which intends to use market transactions exchange––or communication procedures––in
order to change their condition according
to their intention.
Other examinations are also thinkable as well,
for example an economic view or a legal view.

4. Supply chain management and electronic markets
4.1. Why electronic marketplaces need to (re)act
Most observers have assumed that EMs would
come to dominate the B2B landscape. Once you
look beyond the publicity, however, you soon
realise that most EM are ﬂoundering and are

283

adorned with their enormous number of users or
members, their huge product list, the number of
oﬀers to sell or requests to buy that are placed on
their website each day; or the quantities that have
been traded. The number of completed transactions, on the other hand, is much smaller than the
number of members.
Wise and Morrison (2000) name three fatal
ﬂaws of EMs: ‘‘First, the value proposition offered––competitive bidding among suppliers allows buyers to get the lowest possible prices––runs
counter to the best recent thinking on buyer–supplier relations.’’ In their ‘‘purest’’ sense, markets
are characterised by an inﬁnite number of anonymous participants, perfect information transparency and instant competition based on (dynamic)
price alone (Tapscott et al., 2000). Although such a
scenario promises maximum economic welfare via
optimal allocation of resources, it is at as the same
time highly unrealistic as it results in a situation
where corporate proﬁt margins are approaching
zero. Other factors, such as quality, timing of deliveries, and customisation, are often more important than price in determining the overall value
provided by a supplier. Many companies have
spent the last years in managing their supply chain
links and/or have spent the last decades methodically forging tighter, more strategic relationships
with suppliers; many such aﬃliations have involved joint product-design eﬀorts, integration of
complex processes, and long-term service contracts
(Wise and Morrison, 2000). Second, Wise and
Morrison state that EMs deliver little beneﬁt to
sellers: ‘‘Yes, suppliers have access to more buyers
with only a modest increase in marketing cost, but
that beneﬁt is overwhelmed by pricing pressure.
Few suppliers want to be anonymous contestants
in ruthless bidding wars, and for the highestquality, most innovative suppliers, price battles are
anathema.’’ Finally, the business models of most
EMs are, at best, ‘‘half-baked’’. In their rush to get
on-line, the companies that run the EM have not
taken the time to study their customersÕ priorities
in depth, to create distinctive oﬀerings, or even
map out paths to proﬁtability.
Perhaps the most critical question is whether
the technology or the EM itself exacerbates antitrust problems. Susan DeSanti, director of policy

284

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294

planning at the Federal Trade Commission (FTC)
in Washington states that ‘‘anytime there is some
kind of a purchasing joint venture among competitors, it has the potential to raise antitrust issues’’ (Nash, 2000). The competitor watches what
everybody else does, taking advantage of this new
electronic window into a process that used to be
carried out more discreetly with papers, phones
and personal meetings (Nash, 2000).
The question has been raised whether the age of
the new economy will reserve a place for these
intermediaries, given that new technologies facilitate direct links between supply chain members, such as manufacturers and end consumers of
products, or businesses and their suppliers. But,
nevertheless, many researchers state that supply
chain management is a necessity for EMs. The
next section reviews their argumentation.
4.2. Supply chain management and electronic marketplaces––compatible or incompatible?
4.2.1. From a theoretical standpoint
Theoretically, the relationship between EMs
and supply chain management appears problematic. Co-operative supply chains aim to reduce the
number of suppliers and form long-term strategic
alliances that Ôlock inÕ suppliers and Ôlock outÕ
competition, while EMs promote competition and
allow buyers to search for suitable suppliers and
support ‘‘transaction-based’’ partnering.
Economies have two basic mechanisms for
co-ordinating the ﬂow of materials or services
through adjacent steps in the value chain––markets and hierarchies (Malone et al., 1987, 1989;
Picot and Kirchner, 1987). Williamson categorises
transactions into those that support co-ordination
between multiple buyers and sellers, i.e., market
transactions, and those that support co-ordination
within the ﬁrm, as well as the industry value chain,
i.e., hierarchy transactions (Williamson, 1975,
1981). Williamson points out that the choice of
transaction will depend on a number of factors,
including asset speciﬁcity, the partiesÕ interest in
the transaction, and ambiguity and uncertainty in
precisely describing the transaction.
The electronic markets hypothesis developed by
Malone et al. (1987) predicts that, all other things

being equal, the introduction of information
technology will lead to greater use of markets rather than hierarchies for economic transactions.
Lower levels of two factors, asset speciﬁcity and
complexity of description, will favour markets
rather than hierarchies in a given industry.
A highly speciﬁc asset is more likely to be
acquired through hierarchical co-ordination than
through market co-ordination. Transactions involving asset-speciﬁc products often involve a long
process of developments and adjustments for the
supplier to meet the needs of the procurer, a process that favours the continuity found in a hierarchy (Malone et al., 1987).
A product with high description complexity is
more likely to be acquired through hierarchical
co-ordination because of higher transaction costs
associated with the exchange of complex descriptions. In a market these complex descriptions must
be obtained from many possible suppliers to allow
comparisons. Thus, buyers of products with complex descriptions are more likely to work with a
single supplier in a close, hierarchical relationship.
However, some empirical studies focusing on interorganisational systems within the supply chain
have shown that they have actually led to hierarchical co-ordination (Holland, 1995).
Another premise is the move-to-the-middle hypothesis developed by Clemons et al., 1993. Both
theories are extensively discussed within the ﬁeld
of EMs (see e.g. Bakos and Brynjolfsson, 1993;
Hess and Kemerer, 1994; Van Heck and Ribbers,
1997; Bailey and Bakos, 1997; Gregor et al., 1997).
The question if supply chain management and
EMs are compatible, is in fact the question whether EMs are moving to hybrid forms within the
market-hierarchy continuum (Williamson, 1975,
1981) as it was predicted by the move-to-the-middle
hypothesis (Clemons et al., 1993).
4.2.2. From a logistical standpoint
From a logistical standpoint, supply chain management and EMs are not just compatible––EMs
are to a high degree depending on supply chain
management.
Crowley (1998) says that today every business
competes in two markets: the marketplace, in
which resources and products exist physically and

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294

the marketspace, which is a virtual world of electronic commerce in which the main object of
transaction is information. Managing these two
interacting value-adding processes, in the two
mutually dependent realms, is seen as posing new
conceptual and tactical challenges for every ﬁrm.
Graham and Hardaker (2000) argue that the
marketplace is part of the web-based relationships
in the supply chain, which could be divided into
three company perspectives, namely business-tobusiness, business-to-consumer and marketspace.
In this case, the marketspace involves the company, its partners, and its customers and provides
the opportunities for developing communication
interactions, including customer surveys and information exchange on such things as product
warranty and service capabilities. Beyond that, it is
proposed that, with marketspace reconﬁguring the
traditional value proposition, supply chain management needs to manage the organisational
complexity of adopting a dynamic mix and emphasis between content, context and infrastructure.
Integration along the supply chain in the virtual
market can be viewed as being a mix of both formal and loose integration mechanisms, similar to
the Internet infrastructure.
But the question is if Internet transactions and
physical logistics are conﬂicting or complementary. Gur~
al et al. (2001) argue that Internet commerce does not eliminate the need of physical
logistics systems; in fact, it even increases their
importance. The ﬂow of information between the
supply chain partners can be eﬃciently managed
over the Internet, reducing the costs and increasing
the speed and the quality of data transfer. On the
other hand, the EM should organise a complementary physical logistics system in order to distribute material products to its clients. But so far
this is done inadequately. Van Hoek (2001) claims
that the supply chain dimension of e-business is
largely neglected and poorly managed, while the
mal-performance of logistics is currently hampering turnover and revenues of e-commerce applications in a severe way. If basic operational
performance is not even assured, more advanced
approaches of e-business will not take oﬀ, since the
support for concepts in the physical domain is
inadequate.

285

Furthermore, Gur~al et al. (2001) emphasise that
EMs can subcontract the functions of the physical
logistics system from other specialised ﬁrms. It can
be said that the implementation of the Internet is
changing the structure of the classical distribution
channel, encouraging an increased specialisation
of the physical delivery functions. The authors
argue for value networking, in which the EM is
organising and managing a complex portfolio of
partnerships with physical logistics service providers. On the other hand, in many cases, the EM
will decide to create its own physical assets in
order to provide a consistent quality of product
delivery. Benjamin and Wigand (1995), on the
other hand, form a model that contains stakeholders in the value chain, which are connected to
the national information superhighway. This ‘‘highway’’ encloses transportation of both physical
goods and information and connects producers of
information, producers of physical goods, electronic retailers (e-retailers), EMs, physical distribution networks, electronic channels and the
market choice box. Beyond that, they argue that
all stakeholders in the industry value chain must
consider whether their place in the chain is
threatened and, if so, what long-term strategies to
experiment with. Those in the consumer value
chain need to understand under what conditions
the consumer will prefer to purchase from singlesource suppliers and EMs.
More practically oriented research are studies by Emiliani (2000) or by Gudmundsson and
Walczuck (1999) because they bring insights of the
supply chain management within, to speciﬁc kinds
of EMs. While Emiliani (2000) describes the process for conducting B2B auctions over the Internet
and presents common issues, process improvement
opportunities, and the interpretation of auction
results, Gudmundsson and Walczuck (1999) conceptualise the EM for logistics. Emiliani (2000)
argues that an on-line auction is an attractive
technological solution for reducing costs, but it
does not help uncover the root causes of poor cost
management within the buying ﬁrm. Further, the
intermediaries understand commodity management, markets, and information technology very
well, but do not understand supply chain management and lean production, as evidenced by

286

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294

contract terms and conditions. As a result, the
author proposes that online auctions will delay the
adoption of modern supply chain management
methods and the implementation of lean production that are needed by both buyers and suppliers
in order to truly eliminate waste and reduce total
costs.

5. Relevancy of supply chain management in diﬀerent electronic market categories
5.1. Internet-enabled business relationships within
electronic markets
In the following section we analyse the relevancy of supply chain management for EM. The
idea is to examine diﬀerent types of relationship
within diﬀerent EM categories. While there are
myriad aspects within a relationship among trading partners in an EM, three broad categories have
been identiﬁed: transactional, information-sharing,
and collaborative relationships (AMR, 1998). The
suggestion is that barely transactional-oriented
EMs are to a lower degree depending on supply
chain management than collaborative-oriented
EMs.
Transactions within a buyer–seller relationship
involve the activities carried out to execute the
buyerÕs purchase of a commodity. These activities
involve information notifying the buyer and seller
that a purchase is taking place and that funds need
to be exchanged. Historically, EMs have mostly
dealt with the transactional aspects of a relationship. Thus automation has focused on sending
purchase orders and invoices and on transferring
funds. The only information that must be transmitted in this type of relationship that is that
needed to execute a purchase.
The next trading relationship involves information sharing or data exchange. This involves at
least one of the following arrangements (Noekkenved, 2000): (a) The partners are given access to
a system that has the shared information in it, or
(b) one partner transmits shared information to
the other partner. For example, Web-based catalogues allow buyers to electronically view product
information. Various types of information can be

shared by buyer or seller, either before or after a
purchase is made. This information may involve
the sellerÕs oﬀerings or the buyerÕs future needs.
Historically, little information has been electronically shared among trading partners. The recipient
is using the data as-is and is not providing feedback (one-directional information ﬂow); on the
other hand information-sharing does little to reduce the uncertainty faced by trading partners in
determining future demand, and does not grant
the opportunity for the other partner to provide
his or her own insight and knowledge of customer
needs or other market opportunities. In addition,
there is little opportunity to work together on
matching supply with anticipated customer demand.
To further enhance a buyer–seller relationship
some progressive companies are moving towards
collaborative relationships, in which they are
‘‘working jointly with others, especially in an intellectual endeavour’’ (Noekkenved, 2000). Collaborative eﬀorts enable trading partners to work
together to better understand future demand and
to put plans in place to satisfy it proﬁtably. In a
collaborative relationship, information is not just
exchanged and transmitted, but it is also jointly
developed by the buyer together with the seller.
For example, in the case of working collaboratively on customer requirements, trading partners
might collaborate on new product designs and
customer demand forecasts. Generally this information deals with future product plans and needs.
5.2. Diﬀerent electronic marketplaces require supply
chain management
In the section above we elaborated on three
types of information-related relationships within
an EM. That is, some information may be exchanged on a transactional basis, some on an information-sharing basis, and some on a collaborative
basis. Beyond this, collaborative relationships require that the other two types have already been
implemented. It seems to be evident that within the
spread of these relationships, supply chain management seems to be more appropriate, since the
type of relationship within the EM is more of a
collaborative kind.

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294

In the following sections we categorise EMs in
several ways and discuss the buyer–supplier relationship. EMs can be distinguished by the following classiﬁcations:
ii(i) the more stakeholder-focused way divides
EMs into buyer-oriented, seller-oriented and
neutral;
i(ii) the most straightforward categorisation is in
vertical and horizontal EMs;
(iii) the more economic and price-focused classiﬁcation divides EMs into markets with ﬁx or
variable pricing mechanism (auction, exchange,
catalogues);
(iv) EMs can be classiﬁes regarding to the purchasing process ‘‘What’’ and ‘‘How’’ businesses purchase (manufacturing vs. operating
inputs; spot vs. system sourcing);
i(v) another possibility is to distinguish into open
and closed EMs;
(vi) the more process focused categorisation is to
distinguish into supported transactions phases
(information exchange, negotiate, settlement,
after-sales);
(vii) and ﬁnally by the market mechanism (aggregation and matching).
5.2.1. Buyer-oriented, seller-oriented and neutral
EMs
The operator that runs the EM and can be,
depending on the business model (Timmers, 1998),
an autonomous operator (i.e. ChemConnect), a
group of market participants ( ¼ Consortia EMs
like Covisint by General Motors, Ford, DaimlerChrysler), a single supplier or buyer (i.e. Deutsche
TelekomÕs MarketPlace, Auto-Xchange by Ford)
or a service provider, such as WorldWideTesting
(Schmid and Lindemann, 1998). The EM operator
or consortia runs either a buyer-oriented, selleroriented or neutral EM.
The role of a buyer-oriented marketplace is
to aggregate buyers. Buyer-oriented marketplaces
such as CommerceOneÕs MarketSite concentrate
primarily on creating eﬃciencies for the corporate
buyer. Buyer-oriented networks generally have
several objectives, that is to drive procurement
costs down for the participating buyers, to allow
buyers to ‘‘aggregate their expenditure’’, to reduce

287

administration costs, to increase visibility and to
facilitate global sourcing. Buyers have the ability
to join forces with other large buyers to create
procurement syndicates, which can demand more
favourable pricing and trading terms. All three
types of relationships are aligned to increase beneﬁts to buyers.
The seller-oriented aggregated marketplace
concentrates on bringing multiple sellers together
into a central catalogue and product information
repository (i.e. Build-Online, e-Steel). Where buy
side marketplaces target the procurement needs of
corporations, seller-oriented marketplaces focus
on sales. The key to a seller-oriented marketplace
is to provide multiple sellers a forum to present
their catalogues and conduct in trade with as many
buyers as possible––in other words to aggregate
the ‘‘content’’ that will meet the buyers needs.
Seller-oriented marketplaces also have the ability
to aggregate their sellers, acting as a service provider, wrapping products and services together
and oﬀering them to buyers, to EMs, and to buyeroriented aggregated networks directly. All types of
relationships are aligned to increase beneﬁts to
sellers.
Neutral e-markets, driven by a third part (i.e.
CPGmarket, Tribon Marketplace, ChemConnect)
are the true market makers because they are
equally attractive to sellers and buyers. However,
these marketplaces often face the ‘‘chicken-andegg’’ problem: buyers do not want to participate
unless there are a suﬃcient number of sellers, and
sellers do not want to participate unless there are a
suﬃcient number of buyers. In addition, these
neutral markets also have to overcome channel
conﬂicts to persuade more powerful players to
participate. Making deals with more powerful
players to gain liquidity is a threat to their independence and neutrality.
5.2.2. Vertical or horizontal EMs
Fundamentally, there are two kinds of EMs
vertical and horizontal EMs. Vertical EMs are
industry-speciﬁc, i.e. ChemConnect, Chemdex,
OneChem, and e-Chemicals in the chemical industry. Vertical marketplaces aggregate supply or
demand in vertical industries. Vertical marketplaces require a good deal of industry knowledge.

288

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294

They optimise buyer–seller relationships in a speciﬁc industry, such as chemicals, metals, energy,
and telecommunications.
Horizontal EM makers facilitate the purchase and sale of goods and services used by a
range of industries (i.e. Asista, Deutsche Telekom
MarketPlace, BizBuyer, Grainger). Horizontal
marketplaces are also known as ‘‘functional marketplaces’’ because they cut across industries to
optimise speciﬁc functions in an enterprise, including human resources, procurement, logistics
and marketing. A consideration of whether vertical or horizontal markets are more transactional
or collaborative does not appear to be suitable.
In addition, there are companies that provide
vertical and horizontal EMs with the technical
platform. They have become known as Application Service Providers (ASP). Examples are
TRADEX Technologies, The Sun/Netscape Alliance or Trading Dynamics. These companies are
known as ‘‘enablers’’ and oﬀer tools such as information-publishing tools, catalogue software,
transactional capabilities, payment services, or customer relationship management functionality (Fig.
2 gives an overview).
5.2.3. Pricing mechanism
The pricing mechanism used can also categorise
the EM (Kaplan and Sawhney, 1999; Schmid,
1999). In some e-markets like electronic catalogues

Fig. 2. Horizontal (functional) and vertical (industry-speciﬁc)
EMs.

prices are ﬁxed, portals do not have a pricing
mechanism, while in auction or exchange models a
dynamic price-building mechanism is approached.
Online catalogues (i.e. Papersite, Requisite
Technology or Harbinger) take the paper-based
catalogues of multiple vendors, digitise the product information and provide buyers with one-stop
shopping over the Internet. Online catalogues are
optimally suited for markets where the supply and
demand sides of a market are highly fragmented.
Online catalogues are less transactional. They
open a wider range of information sharing and
collaboration.
An EM with auctions price mechanism (i.e.
USBid, Manheim Online, GoCargo) provides a
venue for the purchase and sale of unique items
such as surplus inventory, used capital equipment,
discontinued goods, perishable items, or refurbished products. In a traditional auction, the competitive bidding process results in upward price
movement (Klein, 1997; Vigoroso, 1999; Emiliani,
2000; Baatz, 1999). The reverse auction (i.e. econia.com, ChemConnect, CPGmarket), a format
in which sellers compete for a buyerÕs oﬀer to
purchase, results in downward price movement.
Marketplaces with an exchange model work as
stock exchanges. A real-time bid–ask matching
process is necessary as well as marketwide price
determination. Any kind of dynamic price-building is focused on price reduction and transactional-oriented.
Portals bring together buyers and sellers in
commerce-oriented settings, but do not enable
negotiation transactions (i.e. PharmSource Information Services). Buyers and sellers close deals
oﬄine.
5.2.4. ‘‘What & how’’ businesses purchase
Using the buying behaviour as classiﬁcation
criteria, Kaplan and Sawhney (2000) classify EMs
into four categories, namely MRO hubs, yield
managers, exchanges and catalogues (Fig. 2).
‘‘What businesses buy’’ can roughly be divided
into manufacturing inputs and operating inputs;
manufacturing inputs are raw materials and components that go directly into a product or a process, and operating inputs, which are not part of
the ﬁnished products, operating inputs, often

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294

called maintenance, repair and operating goods
(MRO), include oﬃce supplies, spare parts, airline
tickets and services. Manufacturing inputs tend to
be industry-speciﬁc, whereas operating inputs are
not. In most cases manufacturing inputs require a
higher degree of information sharing and collaboration (Kaplan and Sawhney, 2000).
The second distinction in business purchasing is
‘‘how products and services are bought’’. Companies can either engage in systematic sourcing or
in spot sourcing. Systematic sourcing involves negotiated contracts with qualiﬁed suppliers. Because they tend to be long term, the buyers and
sellers often develop close relationships. In spot
sourcing, the buyerÕs goal is to buy a product at
the lowest possible cost and to speculate. Commodity trading for things like oil, steel, and energy
exempliﬁes this approach. Spot transactions rarely
involve a long-term relationship with the buyer, in
fact, buyers on the spot market often do not know
who they are buying from. In most cases systematic sourcing involves more need for information
sharing and collaboration (Kaplan and Sawhney,
2000).
5.2.5. Open or closed EMs
In addition, it is suitable to distinguish between
open and closed e-markets (Steyer, 1998; Schmid,
1999). An open e-market characterises the public
accessibility for those who follow the e-marketÕs
rules. By contrast a closed e-market is only open
for certain suppliers and customers. Table 2 contains some other diﬀerences.
Van Heck and Ribbers (1997) use a so-called
reach/scope framework for IT infrastructures in

289

the EM context. They propose that an eﬀective
EM with long reach (e.g., a relatively open structure allowing many participants) will have a low
scope (simple functionality). Agreeing on a highly
complex functionality with many participants is
simply too diﬃcult to accomplish. EMs with short
reach (relatively closed structure, resulting in few
participants) may have high scope (complex functionality).
5.2.6. EM transaction phases
EMs facilitate exchange of goods, information,
services, and payments associated with market
transaction (Bakos, 1998; Schmid, 1999). Four
phases of such transactions can be distinguished:
information, negotiation, settlement and after-sales
(see Figs. 3 and 4).
In the information phase, buyers identify and
evaluate their needs and possible sources to fulﬁl
them. At the same time, sellers arrange for providing their goods and identifying potential customers. To a large extent, these steps evolve
around exchange of information. The information
phase ends for a market participant with the submission of an oﬀer. With the receipt of an oﬀer, the
second phase starts, that is the negotiation phase.
Potential buyers and sellers negotiate the terms of
the intended transaction by jointly identifying
possible solutions with the goal of reaching a
consensus. The result is a legal-binding contract,
representing the agreement between the market
partners. In the settlement phase, the agreed-upon
terms of the contract are fulﬁlled. Depending on
the type of the exchanged goods or service as well
as the participating partners, the settlement phase

Table 2
Closed and open EMs
Closed e-market

Open e-market

 Between companies (B2B)

 Between companies (B2B), companies and consumers (B2C, C2B) or
between companies and authorities
 Open (global) market
 Unlimited number of participants
 Open, unprotected network
 Known and unknown partners
 Security and authenticity necessary
 The net is the market
 Low degree of information sharing and collaboration









Closed, often industry-speciﬁc ‘‘clubs’’
Limited number of involved companies
Closed company-owned network (ﬁrewalls)
Known and connected partners
Security through networking
The market is a club
High degree of information sharing and collaboration

290

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294

Fig. 3. EM classiﬁcation by Kaplan and Sawhney (2000).

Fig. 4. Phases of market transactions (compare with Gebauer
(1996), Schmid and Lindemann (1998) and Scharl (2000)).

can be an initiator of secondary market transactions (e.g. logistics and ﬁnancial services). Result
of this phase is the fulﬁlment of the contract. Scharl
(2000) adds a fourth phase, namely after-sales,
including after-sales product support, customer
service, and the evaluation of the transactionÕs
outcome.
Scharl argues that the ﬁrst and last are explicit
market transaction phases, whereas Schmid and
Lindemann say that an EM supports all phases or
at least the information phase of a market transaction. The Internet surrounds EMs with all kinds
of transaction facilities. Portals, for example,
support only the information phase. They bring
together buyers and sellers in commerce-oriented
settings, but do not enable negotiation transac-

tions. Some EMs facilitate all transactions, including after-sales service. A number of EMs oﬀer
secondary transactions and others, again, have
outsourced them. The more the transaction phases
that are supported and the more non-buying/nonselling transactions that are in addition possible,
the more opportunities for information sharing
and collaboration there will be. Some innovative
EMs have broadened their service by providing
additional services such as facilitating collaboration in product development or order management
(i.e. Transora, Envera, Covisint).
5.2.7. Market mechanisms
As we think about the diﬀerences between systematic and spot purchasing, it becomes obvious
that the market-making mechanism that is appropriate for MRO and catalogues are quite different from the mechanism used, for example, by
exchanges. EMs can create value by two fundamentally diﬀerent mechanisms: aggregation and
matching (Segev and Beam, 1999; Bakos, 1991,
1998; Schmid, 1999).
EMs that use the aggregation mechanism bring
together a large number of buyers and sellers
under one virtual roof. They reduce transaction
costs by providing one-stop shopping. The aggregation mechanism is static in nature because prices
are pre-negotiated. An important characteristic of
this mechanism is that adding another buyer to
the market beneﬁts only the sellers, and adding
another seller beneﬁts only the buyers. Unlike
the static aggregation mechanism, the matching
mechanism brings buyers and sellers together to
negotiate prices on a dynamic and real-time basis.
Therefore the matching mechanism leads to more
transactional relationships. The matching mechanism can work in the form of auctions. In the
matching mechanism, the roles of the players are
ﬂuid: buyers can be sellers, and vice versa. Therefore, adding any new member to the EM increases the marketÕs liquidity and thus beneﬁts
both buyers and sellers, while user of catalogues
beneﬁt only from the aggregation mechanism, user
of exchanges beneﬁt from both aggregation and
matching. Therefore, successful exchanges will
reap greater beneﬁts from being ﬁrst movers. That
makes matching a more powerful business model

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294

than aggregation. At the same time, however, the
matching mechanism is far more complex.
6. Further research issues
There is a rapidly growing interest in EMs,
which is currently covered in more than 100 papers
and articles. Unfortunately, most of the published
work, in research and practice, is biased towards
e-commerce, sales and marketing or is simply
counting all sorts of possible values and cost savings. The supply chain dimension of EMs is for the
most part mistreated and handled insuﬃciently.
The paper has covered relatively new ground in
logistics that has been preliminarily studied in
various other disciplines and that is being created
by developments in information technology and
revolutionary changes in business models, brought
about by the Internet.
The paper describes how supply chain management for EMs can be examined that is by
analysing diﬀerent types of EM relationships
(transactional, information-sharing, collaborative)
within diﬀerent EM categories. Beyond the per-

291

spective of supply chain management, a deeper
examination of the relationships within certain
marketplace category is necessary. Based on the
results of this literature review, the author suggests
the following research questions, which should be
empirically tested in future research:
1. Beyond the perspective of supply chain management, the choice of an EM is depending on
the diﬀerent EM categories:
iii(i)
ii(ii)
i(iii)
i(iv)

buyer-oriented, seller-oriented or neutral;
vertical or horizontal;
ﬁx or variable pricing mechanism;
manufacturing or operating inputs; spot or
system sourcing;
ii(v) open or closed;
i(vi) supported transactions phases;
(vii) aggregation or matching mechanism.
2. The type of the EM relationship transactionaloriented, information-sharing, or collaborativeoriented has an inﬂuence on the successful use
of EMs within a supply chain agreement.

Appendix A. Methodological approach
Research strategy

Description

Used key words

• ‘‘Electronic market’’; ‘‘Electronic marketplace’’; ‘‘Electronic
exchange’’; ‘‘Electronic auction’’; ‘‘Electronic SCM’’; ‘‘Internet
exchange’’; ‘‘Electronic hub’’

Time period

• November 2000 until April 2001

Search engines

• www.google.com, www.yahoo.com, www.business.com

Scientiﬁc on-line literature
data bases

• ABI Inform (ProQuest)
• Emerald Library
• ACM Digital Library

Speciﬁc hard copy journal
research Proceedings

• All volumes of the Journal of Electronic Markets
• ACM-Proceedings

Additional research servers

• Goldman Sachs (http://www.gs.com/hightech/research/)
• Deloitte Research (http://www.dc.com/obx/pages.php?Name ¼ eviews),
• PricewaterhouseCoopers (http://www.pwc.de/30000_publikationen/
30000_publikationen.htm)

292

Research strategy

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294

Description
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Internetportals

Nerve Wire (http://www.nervewire.com)
Deutsche Bank (http://www.dbresearch.de/)
Gartner Group (http://gartner12.gartnerweb.com/public/)
Bloor Research (http://www.bloor-research.com/)
Aberdeen Group (http://www.aberdeen.com/)
AMR Research (http://www.amrresearch.com/practices/scs.asp)
Forrester (http://www.forrester.com/)
Xephon (http://www.xephon.com/)
Metagroup-Commerce Chain Management (http://www.metagroup.com/
communities/ccm/ccm.shtml)
McKinsey & Company, (http://www.montgomeryresearch.com/)
Accenture Consulting (http://www.accenture.com/)
IDC (http://www.idc.com/)
Montgomery Research (http://www.montgomeryresearch.com/)

• FTC on Consumer Protection: E-Commerce & the Internet: (http://www.ftc.
gov/bcp/menu-internet.htm)
• E-Commerce Times: http://www.ecommercetimes.com/
• ‘‘Dissertationen Online’’: (http://www.educat.hu-berlin.de/diss_online/
biblio.html)
• The Hub for B2B e-Commerce White Papers: (http://www.nmm.com/
reports/index.asp)
• B2b exchange Database: (http://www.b2bexchanges.com/list.cfm)
• abour.com: (http://onlineretailing.about.com/onlineretailing/cs/
b2bexchanges/index.htm?once ¼ true&amp);
• European Electronic Commerce Website: (http://europa.eu.int/ISPO/
ecommerce/Welcome.html)
• Encyclopedia of the New Economy: (http://hotwired.lycos.com/special/ene/)
• e-Marketer: (http://www.emarketer.com/)
• e-Business Central: (http://www.montgomeryresearch.com/ebcentral/)
• Print-The Premier New Economy Business Technology Portal: (http://
www.brint.com/interest.html)
• Electronic Markets: (http://www.electronicmarkets.org/)
• Skillbot-Community Finder: (http://www.skillbot.com/community/
community.htm)
• DMOZ e-Commerce: (http://dmoz.org/Business/E-Commerce/)
• DMOZ e-markets: (http://dmoz.org/Business/E-Commerce/Marketplaces/)
• WSJ.com-Special Report: E-Commerce: (http://interactive.wsj.com/
public/current/summaries/ecom00-2.htm)

References
AMR, 1998. Are We Moving From Buyer and Seller to Collaborators? SCM Report, American Manufacturing Research Inc.

Ariba, 2000. B2B Marketplaces in the New Economy. Research
Report (Downloadable from website http://www.ariba.
com/com_plat/white_paper_form.cfm).
Baatz, E., 1999. Online auctions start to pick up stream.
Purchasing Magazine 21, 546–556.

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294
Bailey, J.P., Bakos, J.Y., 1997. An exploratory study of the
emerging role of electronic intermediaries. International
Journal of Electronic Commerce 1 (3), 7–20.
Bakos, J.Y., 1991. A strategic analysis of EM. MIS Quarterly
15 (4), 295–310.
Bakos, J.Y., 1998. The emerging role of EM on the Internet.
Communications of the ACM 41 (8), 35–42.
Bakos, J.Y., Brynjolfsson, E., 1993. From vendors to partners:
Information technology and incomplete contracts in buyer–
supplier relationships. Journal of Organisational Computing 3 (3), 301–328.
Benjamin, R., Wigand, R., 1995. Electronic markets and virtual
value chains on the information superhighway. Sloan
Management Review, Winter, 62–72.
Bradley III, D.B., Peters, D., 1997. Electronic Marketplaces:
Collaborate If You Want To Compete. 42nd World
Conference International Council for Small Business, San
Francisco, June.
Clemons, E.K., Reddi, S.P., Row, M.C., 1993. The impact of
information technology on the organisation of economic
activity: The ‘‘move to the middle’’ hypothesis. Journal of
Management Information Systems, Armonk, Fall.
Coppel, J., 2000. E-Commerce: Impacts and Policy Challenges.
OECD Economics Department, Working Paper No. 252,
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OECD, June, (Downloadable from website http://www.oecd.org/eco/eco).
Crowley, J.A., 1998. Virtual logistics: Transport in the marketspace. International Journal of Physical Distribution and
Logistics Management 28 (7), 547–574.
Dai, Q., Kauﬀman, R.J., 2000. Business Models For Internet
Based E-Procurement Systems and B2B EM: An Exploratory Assessment. 34th Hawaii International Conference on
Systems Science, Maui, Hawaii, January.
(The) Economist, 2000. Shopping Around the Web: A Survey
of e-Commerce, 26 February. (Downloadable from website
http://www.economist.com/editorial/freeforall/20000226/
index_survey.html).
Emiliani, M.L., 2000. Business-to-business online auctions: Key
issues for purchasing process improvement. Supply Chain
Management: An International Journal 5 (4), 176–186.
Gebauer, J., 1996. Informationstechnische Unterst€
utzung von
Transaktionen. Gabler, Wiesbaden.
Graham, G., Hardaker, G., 2000. Supply Chain Management
across the Internet. International Journal of Physical
Distribution and Logistics Management 30 (3/4), 286–
295.
Gregor, S., Newman, S., Larner, T., 1997. The Australian Meat
Industry, the EM Hypothesis and Internet Marketing. 10th
International Bled Electronic Commerce Conference, Bled,
Slovenia, 9–11 June.
Gur~
al, C., Ranchhod, A., Hackney, R., 2001. Internet transactions and physical logistics: Conﬂict or complementarity.
Logistics Information Management 14 (1/2), 33–43.
Gudmundsson, S.V., Walczuck, R., 1999. The development of
electronic markets in logistics. International Journal of
Logistics Management 10 (2), 99–113.

293

Henderson, D.R., 1984. Electronic marketing in principle and
practice. American Journal of Agriculture Economics 66
(5), 848–853.
Hess, C.M., Kemerer, C.F., 1994. Computerised loan origination systems: An industry case study of the electronic
market hypothesis. MIS Quarterly 18 (3), 251–275.
Himberger, A., Kr€ahenmann, N., Langenohl, T., Ritz, D.,
Schmid, M., Zbornik, S., 1991. Elektronische M€arkte––
Grundlagen und Forschung. Arbeitsbericht/Bericht IM
HSG/CCEM 14, September, St. Gallen: Institut f€
ur Wirtschaftsinformatik.
Holland, C.P., 1995. Co-operative supply chain management:
The impact of interorganizational information systems.
Journal of Strategic Information Systems 4 (2), 117–133.
Kaplan, S., Sawhney, M., 2000. E-hubs: The New B2B Marketplaces. Harvard Business Review (May/June), 97–104.
Klein, S., 1997. Introduction to electronic auctions. International Journal of Electronic Markets 7 (4), 3–6.
Lipis, L.J., Villars, R., Byron, D., Turner, V., 2000. Putting
Markets into Place: An e-Marketplace Deﬁnition and Forecast. (Downloadable from website http://www.idc.com).
Malone, T.W., Yates, J., Benjamin, R.I., 1987. Electronic
markets and electronic hierarchies. Communications of the
ACM 30, 484–497.
Malone, T., Yates, J., Benjamin, R., 1989. The Logic of Electronic Markets. Harvard Business Review, 166–172.
McCoy, J.H., Sarhan, M.E., 1988. Livestock and Meat Marketing. AVI Book.
Mueller, R.A.E., 2000. Emergent E-Commerce in Agriculture. Agriculture Issues Center, AIC Issues Brief (14),
December.
Nash, K.S., 2000. Reality Check. Computerworld 5, 58–59.
Noekkenved, C., 2000. Collaborative Processes in e-Supply
Networks––Towards Collaborative Community B2b Marketplaces. Research Report. PricewaterhouseCoopers.
Obrecht, J., 2000. Playing e-hub Name Game. Netb2b.com, 3
July, BtoB, p. 9.
Picot, A., Kirchner, C., 1987. Transaction cost analysis of structural changes in the distribution system: Reﬂections on
institutional developments in the federal Republic of Germany. Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics
143, 62–81.
Scharl, A., 2000. Evolutionary Web Development. Applied
Computing. Springer, Berlin.
Schmid, B., 1993. Elektronische M€arkte. Wirtschaftsinformatik
35 (5), 465–480.
Schmid, B., Gr€
utter, R., Schmid-Isler, S., Stanoevska, K.,
St€ahler, P., 1998. Ein Glossar f€
ur die NetAcademy (1)
Institute for Media and Communications Management,
University of St. Gallen, March (Downloadable from
website http://www.netacademy.org).
Schmid, B.F., Lindemann, M.A., 1998. In: Elements of a Reference Model for EM. 31st Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICCSS-31). IEEE Computer
Society Press, Hawaii, USA, pp. 193–201.
Schmid, B.F., 1999. Elektronische M€arkte––Merkmale, Organisation und Potentiale. The mcm institute. University of

294

M. Grieger / European Journal of Operational Research 144 (2003) 280–294

St. Gallen, Switzerland. (Downloadable from website http://
www.netacademy.org).
Segev, A., Gebauer, J., Faeber, F., 1999. Internet-based
Electronic Markets. EM––International Journal of Electronic Markets 9 (3).
Segev, A., Beam, C., 1999. Brokering strategies in electronic
commerce markets. Proceedings of the ﬁrst ACM Conference on Electronic Commerce, 167–176.
€ konomische Analyse elektronischer M€arkte.
Steyer, R., 1998. O
Working paper WI 1, Chair for Business Administration,
Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz. (Downloadable
from website http://wi.bwl.uni-mainz.de/arbeitspapiere/arbarbeitspapiere.html).
Tapscott, D., Ticoll, D., Lowy, A., 2000. Digital Capital––Harnessing The Power of Business Webs. Harvard Business
School Press, Boston, MA.
Timmers, P., 1998. Business Models for Electronic Markets.
EM––International Journal of Electronic Markets 8 (2), 3–8.
Van Heck, E., Ribbers, P.M.A., 1997. Economic eﬀects of EM:
An analysis of four cases in the dutch ﬂower and transport

industries. In: Nunamaker, J.F., Sprague, R.H. (Eds.),
Information Systems––Organisational Systems and Technology. Proceedings of the 29th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. IEEE Computer
Society Press, Los Alamitos, pp. 407–415.
Van Hoek, R., 2001. E-supply chains––virtually non-existing.
Supply chain management: An International Journal 6 (1),
21–28.
Vigoroso, M., 1999. Are Internet Auctions ready to gear up?
Purchasing Magazine 11, 85–86.
Weber, B.W., 1993. How ﬁnancial markets are going on-line.
EM––International Journal of Electronic Markets 3 (3),
6–8.
Williamson, O.E., 1975. Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and
Antitrust Implications. Free Press, New York.
Williamson, O.E., 1981. The economics of organisation: The
transaction cost approach. American Journal of Sociology
87, 548–577.
Wise, R., Morrison, D., 2000. Beyond the exchange––the future
of B2B. Harvard Business Review, 86–96.

