Vol. 26, No. 3, March 2017, pp. 509–524
ISSN 1059-1478|EISSN 1937-5956|17|2603|0509

DOI 10.1111/poms.12653
© 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

P2P Marketplaces and Retailing in the Presence of
Consumers’ Valuation Uncertainty
Lifei Jiang, Stanko Dimitrov, Benny Mantin
Department of Management Sciences, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, Ontario Canada N2L 3G1,
l43jiang@uwaterloo.ca, sdimitro@uwaterloo.ca, bmantin@uwaterloo.ca

an peer-to-peer (P2P) marketplaces benefit traditional supply chains when consumers may experience valuation risk?
P2P marketplaces can mitigate consumers’ risk by allowing them to trade mismatched goods; yet, they also impose a
threat to retailers and their suppliers as they compete over consumers. Further, do profit-maximizing marketplaces always
extract the entire consumer surplus from the online trades? Our two-period model highlights the effects introduced by
P2P marketplaces while accounting for the platform’s pricing decisions. We prove that with low product unit cost, the
P2P marketplace sets its transaction fee to the market clearing price, thereby extracting all of the seller surplus. In this
range of product unit cost, the supply chain partners are worse off due to the emergence of a P2P marketplace. However,
when the unit cost is high, the platform sets its transaction fee to be less than the market clearing price, intentionally leaving money on the table, as a mechanism to stimulate first period demand for new goods in expectation for some of them
to be traded later, in the second period, via the marketplace. It is not until the surplus left with the sellers is sufficiently
high that the supply chain partners manage to extract some of this surplus, ultimately making them better off due to a
P2P marketplace. We further analyze the impact of a P2P marketplace on consumer surplus and social welfare. In addition, we consider model variants accounting for a frictionless platform and consumer strategic waiting.

C

Key words: consumers’ valuation risk; P2P marketplace; retailing strategy; backward induction
History: Received: August 2014; Accepted: February 2016 by Haresh Gurnani, after 3 revisions.

hurdles, such as (excessive) restocking fees,2 nonrefundable fees (e.g., activation fees for mobile
phones), long waiting times (Tuttle 2013) (which exacerbates time spent on traveling back to the store or to
the post office), missing receipts,3 and conditions
imposed by stores for the returned goods to be in likenew condition (AT&T, for instance, also demands the
software accompanying a mobile device to be in unopened shape) or even unopened (for example, computer components, drones, headphones or major
appliances at BestBuy Canada)—a condition that is
not always trivial to satisfy, especially if product fit is
known only through experience. Importantly, for
many goods and many consumers, the trial period
may not suffice to conclude whether they would like
to keep the good or not. These reasons probably
explain the vast amount of unwanted goods that find
their way into peer-to-peer (P2P) platforms, such as
Craigslist, eBay, Kijiji, and more recently FaceBay,
which are marketplaces in which consumers sell
goods directly to one another (Wright 2014).4
We further validate our qualitative observations
above via a survey conducted on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform. In the survey, we asked 113 selfselected participants in the USA about how they use
online platforms to alleviate their valuation uncertainty. Our survey reveals that 33% of all participants

1. Introduction
Buyer uncertainty can unfold in a variety of ways.
Consumers may possess uncertainty regarding their
consumption state—namely how many units they
require and/or how often they use the product—the
type of product they want to consume (Fay and Xie
2010), or the fit of the good for their needs (e.g., as
firms may intentionally limit the amount of information released to consumers (Chu and Zhang 2011)). In
addition, when shopping, consumers may make
quick purchasing decisions only to later realize that
the purchased product has limited or no value to
them. This valuation uncertainty (as in Prasad et al.
2011) exposes consumers to risky decision making
and, accordingly, their willingness to pay is diminished (Grewal et al. 1994, Teo and Yeong 2003). Thus,
valuation uncertainty can inhibit potential consumers
from purchasing, and hence harm the supply chain
partners—the retailers and their immediate suppliers.
Returning unwanted goods is not always an option.
For instance, numerous stores do not accept returns
(apparel, consumer electronics) simply because a customer did not like it, arguing that the experience at
the store should suffice to determine fit.1
Although in other cases consumers can return
unwanted goods, they usually face a number of
509

510

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty
Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

have sold a product online only because it did not
meet their expectations. Of those individuals, 92% stated that knowing that they may sell the product
online alleviated their uncertainty regarding the product meeting their expectations. This survey further
supports our qualitative observations. The complete
survey description and results are provided in
the Online Supplement that accompanies this
manuscript.
Do these P2P platforms hurt retailers in the same
fashion that online retailing was blamed in stealing
market share away from brick-and-mortar stores
(Bhatnagar 2006)? Indeed, a McKinsey report
(MacKenzie et al. 2013) pointed out that companies
such as “Craigslist, eBay, and Etsy (home to almost a
million small businesses) are creating [P2P] marketplaces ... [that] are eating into traditional demand for
retail goods.” However, this view completely ignores
the potential benefit for traditional retailing. Platforms argue that “they can help retailers because
shoppers are more willing to spend if they know they
can easily resale items later” (AP 2014). Evidently,
consumers purchase goods while keeping in mind the
resale value they can fetch through online P2P platforms (AP 2014). This was confirmed in our survey,
however we consider platforms alleviating mismatch
uncertainty more so than recouping costs.
While independent P2P platforms, which are generally profit-maximizing entities, are not established to
hurt or support traditional supply chains per se, in
this manuscript we ask whether the latter are better
off, or worse off, due to the emergence of the former.
On the one hand, supply chain partners can leverage
the advantage of the P2P marketplaces to reduce the
risk faced by consumers and increase their sales. On
the other hand, the supply chain partners need to
compete with the P2P platforms who offer used goods
that eats into their profits.5 Furthermore, profit-maximizing platforms may have the incentive to set the
transaction fee equal to the selling price of the goods
traded on the platform (see, Mantin et al. 2014). By
doing so, all surplus gained could be extracted by the
platform, neutralizing all benefits to the supply chain
partners.
Hence, in this manuscript, we focus our discussion
on the friction between traditional retailing and P2P
platforms by addressing the two opposing forces
brought on by P2P platforms. It is this perspective
that highlights our contribution, as to the best of our
knowledge, this manuscript is the only one to explore
the trade-off between buyer valuation uncertainty
and P2P platforms. In particular, we address a number of important research questions: Would the platform always extract all benefits to sellers, and if not,
why? Can, and under what conditions, P2P marketplaces benefit or harm supply chain partners in the

presence of consumers’ valuation uncertainty? Additionally, can consumers receive any benefits from P2P
marketplaces, or are these benefits neutralized by the
operators of these marketplaces and/or supply chain
partners? Lastly, does a P2P marketplace induce a net
social welfare gain? Namely, a P2P marketplace is
more likely to emerge if it can generate positive profit.
Is this profit merely a redistribution of wealth or generation of new welfare?
To study a P2P marketplace’s pricing decision and
the implications of its emergence on the supply chain
partners, consumers, and social welfare, we consider,
in this study, a two-period setting in which a single
retailer purchases a quantity of a single product from
a single supplier and then sells to consumers. The
consumers are forward-looking, as they take into consideration the possibility that the purchased product
will not match their expectations after purchase. In
each of the periods, the supplier sets the wholesale
prices and then the retailer places his order quantity,
which corresponds to the selling price. Once a platform is established, it allows consumers to salvage the
mismatched products by selling them in the second
period. The profit-maximizing platform generates
revenue by charging consumers a fixed transaction
fee, which is set ahead of any actions taken by the
supply chain partners. Given the transaction fee set
by the platform, the supply chain partners optimize
their decisions to maximize their respective profits.6
The analysis gives rise to several important
insights. Our first finding is that the profit maximizing platform does not always extract all surplus form
the consumers who sell their unwanted goods via the
platform. While existing literature has either assumed
an exogenous transaction fee or simply that the platform is a fringe and hence extracts all surplus from
the marketplace sellers, we endogenize this decision
made by the platform operator. Indeed, when the unit
cost of the product is sufficiently low, the platform
behaves as in Mantin et al. (2014) and extracts all surplus. However, when the unit cost is high, then the
platform sets the transaction fee to be lower than the
market clearing price. The incentive of the platform
operator in this case is clear: the high unit cost, which
is then reflected by a high selling price, inflicts a high
loss to consumers when a mismatch occurs. To relieve
consumers and stimulate first period demand, in
expectation of increased platform traffic in the second
period, the platform operator commits to a transaction fee that leaves sellers with some surplus.7
Second, when a profit-maximizing P2P platform is
involved, both supply chain partners will be better off
if the product’s unit cost is sufficiently high and both
will be worse off otherwise (we also note that the minimum unit cost that makes the supply chain partners
better off is higher than the minimum unit cost that

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty
Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

makes consumers better off). The intuition behind this
is that a P2P platform may stimulate first period
demand by eliminating consumers’ valuation uncertainty and induce the supply chain partners to
increase the price of new products, however, the platform also imposes competition that impairs the supply chain partners’ second period profit. When the
product’s unit cost is low, the ratio of transaction fee
to mismatched goods selling price is high, which
means the platform extracts all or most of the surplus
form its consumers and hence reduces first period
demand. As a result, the supply chain partners will
not gain enough to compensate the loss from the competition brought on by the platform in the second period due to low first period demand.
Third, when the product’s unit cost is sufficiently
high, a P2P platform benefits consumers in two ways:
(1) it introduces competition between new and used
goods in the second period and (2) it relieves consumers from their valuation uncertainty as they
recoup some of the loss by selling mismatched products through the platform. Thus, the price of new
goods in the second period is lower and consumers
surplus in the first period can be higher while inducing more consumers to purchase the good, overall
making consumers better off. Importantly, we find
that the social welfare can be improved as all parties
—the consumers, the marketplace, and the supply
chain partners—may be simultaneously better off. In
the alternate case, when the product’s unit cost is sufficiently low, the platform’s harm outweigh its benefit, making consumers worse off. In this setting, the
upward price pressure on the retailer in the first period eliminates some consumers from purchasing in
the first period—an effect that outweighs the benefit
of additional consumers purchasing from the platform. In this case, not only consumers are worse off:
the upward price pressure on the retailer results in
net loss in profits for the supply chain partners as
well.
Fourth, as we also distinguish between a profitmaximizing platform and a frictionless P2P platform
which charges no transaction fee for online trades
among consumers, we find that the frictionless P2P
platform further stimulates competition in the second
period driven by the increased demand experienced
in the first period. As the frictionless platform gains
no profit from online transactions, the supply chain
partners are generally better off unless the mismatched probability is high and the unit cost is low,
and consumers are always better off compared to the
benchmark scenario. All agents are never worse off
and mostly better off compared to the profit-maximizing platform scenario.
Last, the analysis of the setting where consumers
exhibit strategic waiting—those who arrive in the first

511

period may delay their purchase of a new good to the
second period—suggests that the retailer can still be
better off due to the presence of a platform. Interestingly, the platform can further benefit the retailer
when the probability of a mismatch is relatively high.
This occurs as the platform, which provides consumers with a channel to trade their mismatched
goods, allows the retailer to inter-temporally segment
the consumers who arrive in the first period, by committing, in such a setting, to increase the price over
time.
The rest of the study is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of related literature. Section 3
describes the model framework. The benchmark scenario and the scenario that accounts for the presence
of a profit-maximizing platform are analyzed in section 4. In section 5, we further discuss the implications
of the platform on the supply chain partners, consumers and social welfare. The scenarios with a frictionless platform and strategic waiting are analyzed
in section 6. Lastly, section 7 concludes the study.

2. Literature Review
Several papers have studied the impact of secondary,
used goods, markets on the primary, new goods, markets. For example, Chen et al. (2013) developed a
dynamic model where consumers experience random
valuation shocks and goods stochastically perish over
time, and then calibrated the model using automotive
sales data revealing a drop of 35% in retailers’ profitability due to secondary used goods trading. Johnson (2011) focused on the role of the retailers’ choice
of product durability in a two-period setting with random redraw of consumers valuations, in suggesting
constellations where secondary markets may increase
a monopolist’s profits. Our study contributes to this
stream by integrating the important aspect of buyer
uncertainty and the corresponding product mismatch
consumers face while accounting for the presence of a
supplier to account for channel coordination
considerations.
A related stream of literature considers the impact
of various secondary marketplaces on the supply
chain. Shulman and Coughlan (2007), who explicitly
account for the role of the supplier, limit the scope of
their study to a retailer-controlled secondary market:
the retailer buys back used goods at a pre-determined
price (which is a major lever in controlling the flow of
used goods back to the market) from the consumers
and resells them in the second period alongside new
goods, implying that under certain conditions, the
retailer effectively operates a rental market. We differ
from this model by capturing both the role of the
independent secondary market where prices are
determined endogenously and the valuation

512

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty
Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

uncertainty that consumers encounter. A similar
paper by Ghose et al. (2005) investigate in the impact
of a retailer operated P2P platform on the suppliers.
Specifically, they show while a monopoly supplier
might be worse off due to a platform, duopoly suppliers with quality differentiated goods might be better
off. An independent secondary market is studied by
Oraiopoulos et al. (2012), where the market operator
purchases used goods from consumers, refurbishes
them and then the consumers who buy these units
purchase a license from the Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM). The OEM, by setting this relicensing
fee, can control the secondary market (i.e., it can effectively shut down this market by charging a high
licensing fee). The authors find that the OEM keeps
the secondary market when consumers’ willingness
to pay for a refurbished good is high as the OEM benefits twice: relicensing fee and higher selling price
(due to resale value). In our setting, the retailer does
not have this luxury of two streams of revenue while
the entrant operates a platform (rather than as a retailer). Hence, our focus is on the effect of platforms in
the absence of the relicensing fee while further
accounting for the role of consumers’ uncertainty.
Closely related to our contribution are the papers
by Yin et al. (2010) and G€
um€
ußs et al. (2013). Yin et al.
(2010) consider supplier induced product upgrades
and the presence of a secondary used good market
(either retailer-controlled and/or P2P platform),
where they find that the supply-chain partners may
benefit from the emergence of P2P platforms. G€
um€
ußs
et al. (2013) explore the role of P2P platforms in affecting the supplier’s choice of return policies offered to
the retailer in a two-period setting. The buyback
option has an important role in mediating competition: the retailer returns all unsold goods back to the
supplier to avoid competition with the platform.
However, in both papers, consumers do not face valuation risk and after using the good, all consumers
return or resell the good. Additionally, our manuscript further differentiates from the above contributions as we distinguish between platforms that charge
a transaction fee from the sellers, with the transaction
fee being endogenously determined in our model,
(which are common in practice, such as eBay) and
frictionless platforms (an assumption adopted by
most of the above-mentioned papers). Endogenizing
the platform transaction fee generalizes the only
result we are aware of in profit maximizing P2P platforms by Mantin et al. (2014), who assumed the platform sets the transaction fee to the market clearing
price. By contrast, we show that the profit maximizing
platform does not always extract all consumer surplus and characterize the conditions, sufficiently high
per-unit product cost, in which the platform extracts
only some of the surplus.

Online P2P platforms have attracted other research
questions, such as the empirical investigation of the
role of online deal-forums in influencing the trading
prices on P2P platforms (which supports our assumption of a market clearance mechanism) Gopal et al.
(2006). Others have focused on Amazon’s dual-format
retailing, such as Mantin et al. (2014) and the substitution between new and used books offered on Amazon
Ghose et al. (2006). More broadly, a P2P platform can
be perceived as a two-sided market. The two-sided
market literature endogenizes the transaction fee, but
it is primarily concerned with market participation,
by controlling access and usage fees. Generally, this
literature does not consider competition between secondary and primary markets (Rochet and Tirole
2006).
The other aspect of our modeling framework is
consumers’ buyer uncertainty, which then results
with a product mismatch. A stream of research
explores pricing strategies in the presence of such
risk. Hsiao and Chen (2012) note that quality risk
has an impact on the retailer’s return policy and
pricing strategies. Other papers extend the product
return literature to account for various constellations
such as competition and supply chain considerations (see, e.g., Shulman et al. 2009, 2010, 2011). Gu
and Liu (2013) argue that better matching between
consumers and products may hurt the retailer’s
profit, in which case, the retailer cuts its own sales
commissions and blocks manufacturer SPIFF (Sales
Person Incentive Funding Formula) programs so as
to suppress retail sales assistance provided by its
own personnel. In B2C channels, retailers and consumers face not only product quality risk, but also
valuation uncertainty due to information asymmetry. Given consumers’ uncertainty, Chu and Zhang
(2011) show that a retailer can induce consumers
into pre-ordering goods by controlling product
information release. Consumers’ valuation uncertainty plays an important role in their behaviors.
Indeed, it is often considered in supply chain studies; yet, this consideration is rather absent when a
P2P platform is present. Our study contributes to
the literature by highlighting the role of consumers’
valuation uncertainty in the interaction between a
P2P platform and supply chain partners.

3. Modeling Framework
In this section, we describe our model setup and the
methods to solve the model. In order, to capture the
inter-temporal interaction within supply chain members and consumers, we simplify time, by only considering two periods, with pricing, production, and
purchase decisions being made in both periods. We
first consider a benchmark scenario, where a single

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty
Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

profit-maximizing retailer purchases new durable
products from one profit-maximizing supplier and
then retails them to consumers in the absence of a
platform. We then consider a scenario, where a profitmaximizing platform is present and competes with
the retailer in the second period by letting consumers
trade mismatched goods purchased in the first period.
Later in the manuscript, we also consider the special
case of a frictionless platform scenario. For all scenarios, we consider ex ante equilibrium decisions and
assume risk-neutral agents.
Similar to Yin et al. (2010), a new set of consumers
shows up in each period and their initial valuations
v are uniformly distributed between 0 and 1. Those
consumers also face valuation uncertainty: due to a
variety of issues, not entirely modeled in this study,
such as lack of information, consumers may find the
good to be unfit for their purposes. Specifically, we
assume that after some preliminary use, consumers
realize their actual valuation for the good. In practice, consumers may develop expectations about
their valuation for the goods based on, for example,
media attention, commercials, or word-of-mouth.
However, they may not know their true valuation
for the good until some preliminary use. This is true
for a variety of products such as some electronic
goods, where the user experience can be quite instrumental in determining whether the consumer would
like to own the good or not. Unfortunately, for many
of these goods, it is not possible to return the item
after initial use, and thus a consumer may be left
with a negative net utility after realizing their true
personal value of the good. Using the terminology
used in Hsiao and Chen (2012), we assume that with
some probability, consumers find the product to be
mismatched and hence has no value for them, and
with the complementary probability the good has
the full initial valuation, v. We use ai 2 f0; 1g to indicate consumer i’s mismatch realization, where ai ¼ 1
implies that the product is a mismatch and hence the
realized valuation of the product is 0, and ai ¼ 0
indicates a match and hence the full valuation v is
materialized. We let h 2 [0,1] represent the probability of consumers having full private valuation, that
is, ai ¼ 0. For the purpose of simplification, we
assume consumers are homogeneous with respect to
their uncertainty risk, which means h is also the
expected probability of consumers having a matched
product. Since consumers are risk-neutral and forward looking,8 they purchase the good only if their
expected utility, hvp, where p denotes the price, is
non-negative.
Throughout the analysis, we use the following
notation: Let the first superscript, i, denote the scenarios and the second superscript, j, denote the players.
The first subscript, t, denotes the periods and the

513

second subscript, r, denotes the types of products.
The complete notation is provided in Table 1.
The sequence of events in the benchmark setting is
depicted in the top row of Figure 1. In period 1, the
supplier sets the wholesale price wBS
1n , then the retailer
purchases an amount, qBR
,
of
new
products from the
1n
supplier. This quantity corresponds to a first period’s
9
selling price pBR
1n . We use c to denote the unit cost of
acquiring one product for the supplier, and we
assume c < h. This assumption is necessary to satisfy
the supplier’s individual rationality constraint by
guaranteeing positive profit in expectation in all scenarios. After pBR
1n has been announced, consumers buy
products based on their expected utility. At the end of
period 1, individual mismatch, ai , is realized and all
consumers with mismatched products (ð1  hÞqBR
1n in
expectation) experience a negative utility, pBR
1n . As
discussed previously, we assume that customers cannot return used goods to the retailer for a refund,
instead, in our model the consumer may only sell
their used goods via a P2P platform, if it is available.
This is indeed the case for most electronic goods, and
such goods may be seen sold on P2P platforms.
In period 2, a new set of consumers shows up. In
our study, we are not considering completely new
products, period to period, and as such consumers
that have made their decision in the first period have
no reason to reconsider the decision again in the second. Implicitly, we do not consider strategic waiting
by consumers in the main model of our study, however we discuss the impact of strategic consumers,
those that decide to wait between period 1 to period 2
in section 6.2. The supplier sets the new wholesale
BR
price wBS
2n , then the retailer purchases an amount, q2n ,
of new products from the supplier and hence the second period’s selling price pBR
2n is determined. As
before, consumers buy products based on their
expected utility.10
To capture the effect of a P2P platform, which
allows used goods from the first period to be traded
Table 1 Some Notation: i 2 {B,P,F}, j 2 {S,R,P}, t 2 {1,2}, r 2 {n,p},
where B,P, and F stand for the benchmark, profit-maximizing,
and frictionless platform scenarios, respectively; S,R, and P
stand for the supplier, retailer, and platform, respectively; n
and p stand for new and platform products, respectively.
Utri
wtniS
ptrij
qtrij
iP
tQ
ij
Qtij
CS i
SW i

consumers’ expected utility from buying type r product in period
t in scenario i
wholesale price of new product in period t in scenario i
selling price of type r product from player j in period t in
scenario i
demand of type r product from player j in period t in scenario i
platform transaction fee in scenario i
player j’s profit in period t in scenario i
player j’s total profit in scenario i
consumer surplus in scenario i
social welfare in scenario i

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty

514
Figure 1

Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

Timeline of Events: Events that Occur Only in the Presence of the Platform Are with Dashed Arrows; Non-Decision Events Are in Italic
Platform
commitment
Benchmark
only:

Additional
actions in
presence of
platform:

Period 1

Period 2

Supplier: Retailer:
w1n
p1n
realized

Supplier: Retailer:
w2n
p2n
realized

Timeline
Platform: t

in the second period between consumers, on the supply chain partners and the consumers, we consider a
variation to the benchmark scenario. In this augmented scenario, the retailer sells new products in
both periods, while used products are traded through
the platform only in the second period. Used goods
sold on the platform are all mismatched goods from
the first period that consumers were not able to return
to the retailer.
The Stackelberg game sequence of events in the
presence of a platform, which is shown in Figure 1,
is as follows: Following Mantin et al. (2014), in the
first stage, the platform commits to a fixed transaction fee to charge consumers for selling through
the platform; a profit-maximizing platform sets tPP ,
whereas with a frictionless platform we have
tFP ¼ 0. In practice P2P platform fees are posted
online and are rarely changed, for example Amazon, EBay, and Etsy.11 Then, as in the benchmark
scenario, the supplier sets wPS
1n , the retailer purPR
chases qPR
1n units (corresponding to a price p1n ),
and the consumers purchase based on their
expected utility. At the end of period 1, all consumers with mismatched products (ð1  hÞqPR
1n in
expectation) wait to sell their products through the
P2P market in the second period. In period 2, as
a new set of consumers shows up, the supplier
12
sets wPS
and the retailer purchases qPR
2n units.
2n ,
PR
Meanwhile qPP
used products are
2p ¼ ð1  hÞq1n
offered through the platform. Used products
traded through the P2P market are devalued by a
factor d 2 [0,1]. That is, the expected benefit of
these products by consumers in the second period
is hdv. Since used products on the P2P platform
are sold to clear the market, the corresponding
prices of new and mismatched products, pPR
2n and
pPP
,
are
determined
simultaneously.
Note,
although
2p
we use P for the first superscript, the logic holds
for F.

4. Model Analysis
Next, we solve using backward induction for each of
the scenarios described earlier. We start with the
benchmark scenario (section 4.1), and then proceed to
the platform scenarios (section 4.2).

p2p determined

4.1. Benchmark Scenario: No P2P Platform
In this section, we explore the supply chain partners’
equilibrium decisions and resulting profit in the benchmark scenario. In period 1, the expected utility from
buying a product is the consumer’s expected valuation
of the product minus its selling price, that is,
B
¼ hv  pBR
U1n
1n . The consumer, indifferent between
buying and not buying a product in period 1, has a valuation of vB1  pBR
1n =h. Then the quantity of products
sold in period 1 is given by qBR
vB1 ¼ 1  pBR
1n ¼ 1  
1n =h,
which follows from the assumption that consumers’
valuations are uniformly distributed between 0 and 1.
BR
Similarly, in period 2, we have qBR
2n ¼ 1  p2n =h.
Having derived the demand functions, we can
express the supplier’s and the retailer’s profit functions. In period 2, the profit of the retailer is given by
QBR
BR
BS BR
BR
BS BR
2 ¼ ðp2n  w2n Þq2n ¼ ðhð1  q2n Þ  w2n Þq2n , which
Q
BR
with respect
is concave in qBR
2n . Maximizing
2
BR
to q2n , we find the optimal decisions to be qBR
¼
QBR 2n
BS
BR
BS
ðh  w2n Þ= 2h [ 0, p2n ¼ ðh þ w2n Þ=2,
¼ ðh
2
QBS
2
Þ
=4h
[
0.
Next,
maximizing
with
respect
to
wBS
2
2n
BS
BS
w2n leads to w2n ¼ ðh þ cÞ=2, and consequently
QBS
¼ ðh  cÞ2 = 8h [ 0. In this benchmark setting, the
2
two periods are independent of each other, hence all
equilibrium decisions and profits in period 1 are as in
period 2.
BR
In summary, we find that qBR
1n ¼ q2n ¼ ðh  cÞ=4h,
Q
BR
BS
BS
pBR
¼
p
¼
ð3h
þ
cÞ=4,
w
¼
w
¼
ðh þ cÞ=2, BR
1n
2n
1n
2n
Q
¼ ðh  cÞ2 =8h, and BS ¼ ðh  cÞ2 =4h. Recall that we
assume c<h, which guarantees strictly positive quantities. The profits of the supplier and the retailer are
decreasing in c, and increasing in h. That is, higher unit
cost and more consumers uncertainty regarding their
valuation will harm the supply chain partners’ profits.
In this benchmark scenario, there is no channel for
consumers to trade their mismatched products; hence
they receive negative utility when a product mismatch occurs. In the next subsection we explore if a
P2P platform can remedy the mismatch issue.
4.2. A P2P Platform Scenario
In the presence of a platform, a consumer has the
option of selling the product in the second period at
PP
the market clearing price, pPP
2p , while paying a fee t

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty
Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

to the platform for using this service. Thus, in period
1, the expected utility from buying a product is a consumer’s expected valuation of a product minus its
selling price, plus his expected payoff from selling the
product through the platform, that is,
P
U1n
¼

hv
|{z}
expected valuation

PP
PP
 pPR
1n þ ð1  hÞðp2p  t Þ
|{z}
|ﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ{zﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄﬄ}
price

expected payoff

A consumer is indifferent between buying and not
buying a product in period 1 when his valuation of
PP
PP
the product is 
vP1 ¼ ðpPR
1n  ð1  hÞðp2p  t ÞÞ=h,
PR
P
implying q1n ¼ 1  
v1 . In period 2, the expected utilP
ity from buying a new product is U2n
¼ hv  pPR
2n ,
whereas the expected utility of buying a used proP
duct from the platform is U2p
¼ hdv  pPP
2p . A consumer is indifferent between buying a new product
and a used product in period 2 if his valuation of
PP
the used P2P product is 
vP2p ¼ ðpPR
2n  p2p Þ=ð1  dÞh,
PR
P
implying q2n ¼ 1  
v2p . A consumer is indifferent
between buying and not buying a used product
from the platform when his valuation of the used
PP
product is 
vPp ¼ pPP
vP2p  vPp .
2p =dh, implying q2p ¼ 
Having derived the demand functions, we solve the
Stackelberg game via backward induction.
Let
c1  h 

hð1  hÞðd2 ð1  hÞ2 ð96  40dÞ þ 128dÞ
128  ð1  hÞðð1  hÞðð1  hÞd2 ð36  11dÞ
þ 56d2  144dÞ þ 16dhÞ

c2  h 

515

corresponding decisions are demonstrated in Figure 2.
From the platform’s perspective, his profit is affected by
the transaction fee and the demand of new products in
the first period, which in turn, determines the number of
used goods available in the second period. Therefore,
the platform is trading-off between setting a high transaction fee, referred to as the transaction fee effect, and
having high first period demand, referred to as the
demand effect, because a higher transaction fee
decreases the demand, and vice verse. Therefore, the
optimal transaction fee is a result of the interaction
between the transaction fee effect and the demand effect.
Lemma 1 shows that when the product’s unit cost
is sufficiently low, the platform can set the transaction
fee as high as possible, equal to the selling price of the
used goods. In other words, the transaction fee effect
dominates the demand effect, and the platform has
the power to extract the entire surplus from consumers who use its service. As the unit cost increases,
the transaction fee effect decreases while the demand
effect increases, as seen in Segment 2 in Figure 2, in
which case the platform’s power is weakened. In
order to stimulate first period demand, the platform
must reduce its transaction fee so as to compensate
consumers that may experience a mismatched product. As the unit cost continues to increase, the platform will induce the supply chain partners to

Figure 2

Transaction Fee and Used Goods’ Price, h=0.2, d=0.9

8hd2 ð1  hÞ2
h
64  ð1  hÞð19ð1  hÞd2 þ 64hd  56dÞ

We have the following Lemma. All proofs are provided in Appendix A.
LEMMA 1. In equilibrium, the profit-maximizing platform sets the transaction fee, tPP , depending on three different segments as follows:
Segment 1: if the unit cost of acquiring the products is
sufficiently low, c  c1 , then the platform transaction fee
is equal to the used product’s selling price (tPP ¼ pPP
2p ) to
extract all benefits from its consumers;
Segment 2: if c1 \c  c2 , then the transaction fee is lower
than the used product’s selling price (tPP \pPP
2p ) to
induce more consumers to purchase in the first period;
Segment 3: if the unit cost of acquiring the products is
sufficiently high, c [ c2 , then the platform sets the transaction fee to price the supply chain partners out of the
second period (i.e., qPR
2n ¼ 0).
Lemma 1 is formally restated in Appendix A. The
optimal transaction fee and supply chain partners’

Note. h is intentionally chosen to a low value to emphasize Segment 3. This segment always exist since c2 ≤ h.

516

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty
Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

abandon their business in the second period (Segment
3). Therefore, the mismatched goods on the platform
are the only goods sold in the market during the second period. The platform may extract more of the surplus of the consumers using the platform to sell their
mismatched goods, but not enough to extract the
entire surplus because the threat of the retailer selling
new goods in the second period. The existence of Segments 2 and 3 is important. They reveal that the platform has the incentive to leave money on the table by
charging the users of the marketplace a fee that is
strictly less than the market clearing price. This result
is by contrast to the assumption made by Mantin
et al. (2014) who assumed the platform will extract all
surplus from the platform sellers.

Figure 3

Unit Cost Thresholds for Supply Chain, d=0.9

5. The Impact of a Profit-Maximizing
P2P Platform
In this section, we investigate the net effect of a
profit-maximizing P2P platform on supply chain
partners and consumers. Comparing the profits of
the supply chain partners between the benchmark
and platform scenarios, we find that the supply
chain partners can be better off with a high unit cost
and worse off otherwise. This is formally stated in
the following theorem.
THEOREM 1.

The introduction of a P2P platform

(1) reduces the total expected profit of supply chain
partners when the unit cost is sufficiently low,
that is, c\~csc 2 ½c1 ; c2 ;
(2) increases the total expected profit of supply chain
partners when the unit cost is sufficiently high,
that is, c  ~csc ,
where Q~csc isQ theQ threshold
Q
BS
þ BR ¼ PS þ PR .

value

that

solves

The threshold ~csc in Theorem 1 and its corresponding regions are depicted in Figure 3. From the supply
chain partners’ perspective, the emergence of a P2P
platform induces several effects. In the second period
of the platform scenario relative to the second period
of the benchmark scenario, the platform exposes the
supply chain partners to competition from used products, which results in lower wholesale prices, selling
prices, as well as lower demand for new products
than those in the benchmark, and hence lower profit
in the second period. At the same time, because the
platform mitigates some of the mismatch risk, the
supply chain partners can increase the prices of new
products in the first period. However, higher selling
price also has a negative effect on the first period
demand. As the unit cost increases, c  c1 , the platform lowers the transaction fee to increase consumers’

expected payoff to stimulate first period demand.
When the platform’s demand stimulation effect dominates the negative effect of higher prices, it results in
greater first period profit compared to the benchmark
scenario. As the unit cost increases, the gain in the
first period stemming the presence of the platform
eventually exceeds the loss in the second period from
the platform competition, which leads to a net positive effect of the platform (once c [ ~csc , in Segment 2
in Figure 4). In other words, the advantage of a P2P
platform is that it increases the price of new products
and may stimulate first period demand, but the disadvantage is that the competition impairs the supply
chain partners’ profit. Only when the unit cost is sufficiently high, will the benefit compensate the potential
harm of having a platform, making the supply chain
partners better off.
While generally both supply chain partners are
either better off or worse off with the introduction of a
platform, there exists a relatively small range of c values where the retailer is better off while the supplier
is worse off (see Proposition A.1 in the Online Supplement).
The results above indicate that the effect of a
platform on the supply chain partners depends on
the value of product’s unit cost. We now consider the
platform’s impact on consumer surplus, which is the
cumulative integration of consumers’ net utility over
valuation in two periods (see Proof of Theorem 2 in
Appendix A for formal statement). That is, the monetary gain obtained by consumers for purchasing a

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty
Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

Figure 4 Comparisons of Supply Chain Partners’ Total Profits between
Benchmark and Platform Scenarios, h=0.2, d=0.9

product at a price less than the highest price that they
would be willing to pay.
THEOREM 2. The introduction of a profit-maximizing
P2P platform makes consumers worse off when the
probability of consumers having full private valuation
and the products’ unit cost are both sufficiently low, that
is, h  ~
hðdÞ and c  ~ccs ðd; hÞ. Otherwise, consumers are
better off in the presence of a platform, that is, h [ ~hðdÞ
or h  ~
hðdÞ and c [ ~ccs ðd; hÞ.
This is an important insight. The perceived knowledge is that a P2P platform always benefits consumers
as it offers a channel to trade used goods and provides downward pressure on the existing supply
chain partners to lower prices. We find that this is
generally true but not universally, as a platform
allows consumers to recover some of the loss from a
mismatched product and benefit from a more diverse
second period market as well. Although the higher
first period price erodes these gains, it is not enough
to make consumers worse off, unless consumers are
extremely uncertain about the products’ valuation
and the unit cost is also very low. In that case, a
profit-maximizing platform can be detrimental to consumers’ welfare (see Figure 5).
Lastly, we consider the net effect of a profitmaximizing platform on social welfare, which is
the aggregated welfare of all agents, that is,

517

Figure 5 Effect of Introduction of a Profit-Maximizing P2P Platform on
Consumer Surplus and Social Welfare

Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
SW B  BS þ BR þCSB , SW P  PP þ PS þ PR þCSP .
Trivially, when product’s unit cost is high, a platform is welfare-imposing, as the supply chain partners and consumers are better off and the platform
makes positive profit. However, the two previous
results reveal the erosion of the supply chain partners’ and possibly the consumers’ welfare in the
presence of a platform when h and c are both sufficiently low. Below we explore if a profit-maximizing
platform creates welfare in the system, or simply
gravitates welfare away from the existing agents,
the supplier, retailer and consumers. We have the
following insight.
THEOREM 3. The introduction of a profit-maximizing
P2P platform makes total social welfare worse off when
the probability of consumers having full private valuation
and the products’ unit cost are both sufficiently low, that
is, h  ~h0 ðdÞ and c  ~csw ðd; hÞ. Otherwise, social welfare is
better off in the presence of a platform, that is, h [ ~
h0 ðdÞ
0
~
or h  h ðdÞ and c [ ~csw ðd; hÞ.
This theorem indicates that a P2P platform is not
always beneficial to society as shown in Figure 5.
Specifically, when consumers are not certain about
the product’s valuation and the unit cost is sufficiently low, the emergence of a P2P platform has a
detrimental effect on social welfare.

6. Model Extensions
In this section, we consider two extensions to the
model presented so far. We first consider a frictionless

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty

518

Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

P2P platform, one in which the platform does not
charge any transaction fee. We then consider the
impact of strategic consumers.13
6.1. A Frictionless P2P Platform
We have shown that a profit-maximizing platform
can critically affect supply chain partners’ optimal
decisions and profits. However, in practice we also
observe a variety of frictionless platforms, such as
Kijiji, Craigslist and autoTRADER, which allow their
customers to trade through the platform generally for
free but each profits from other sources, like advertisements and etc. In this section, we explore how a
frictionless platform affects the supply chain partners
and consumers as compared to the two scenarios
studied earlier: the benchmark and in the presence of
a profit-maximizing platform.
From modeling perspective, when the platform is
frictionless, the only difference from the profit-maximizing platform setting studied earlier is that the platform commits to a zero transaction fee, that is, tPP ,
which is tFP in the current setting, is 0. Using backward induction, we derive the equilibrium decisions
and corresponding profits. Similar to Lemma 1, we
have the following result.
LEMMA 2. In the presence of a frictionless platform, in
equilibrium, there exists a threshold unit cost,
cf  h 

8hd2 ð1  hÞ2
32  dð1  hÞð7dð1  hÞ  8ð3  4hÞÞ

such that, when c [ cf , the supply chain partners are
priced out of the second period (i.e. qFR
2n ¼ 0). Additionally, cf \c2 , which implies that the range of unit cost values for which they are priced out is larger with a
frictionless platform compared to a profit-maximizing
one.
Lemma 2 is very insightful and its intuition is as follows: When the platform charges no fee from its
users, more mismatched goods are traded through
the platform, thereby increasing the range of unit cost
values under which the supply chain partners are
priced out of the market in the second period. This
raises a compelling question: as this occurs, are the
supplier and retailer better off in the presence of a
frictionless market? Importantly, no transaction fee
stimulates the first period demand and further leads
to greater supply of used goods in the second period.
Consequently, we have the following statement.
THEOREM 4.

A frictionless P2P platform:

(1) generally makes the supply chain partners better
off and always makes consumers better off, as compared to the benchmark scenario. Specifically, the

supply chain partners are worse off when the probability of consumers having full private valuation
and the products’ unit cost are both sufficiently
low, that is, h  ^hðdÞ and c  ^csc ðd; hÞ. Otherwise,
they are better off in the presence of a frictionless
platform, that is, h [ ^hðdÞ or h  ^hðdÞ and
c [ ^csc ðd; hÞ.
(2) always makes the supplier better off, and the retailer and consumers never worse off, as compared to
a profit-maximizing platform scenario. Specifically,
the retailer and consumers are better off when
c\c2 and no worse off otherwise.14
The introduction of a platform relieves consumers
from some of their mismatch risk and exposes the
supply chain partners to competition in the second
period. A frictionless platform further stimulates
competition in the second period, but the fact that it
doesn’t charge any transaction fee and induces
greater demand in the first period, which more than
compensates the supply chain partners for the lost, or
reduced, opportunity in the second period. Similarly,
consumers are also better off as the reduction of risk
more than compensates for the higher price charged
in the first period.
To conclude, a frictionless platform improves the
profit of both supply chain partners as well as consumer welfare as compared to the benchmark scenario. Similar improvements are observed when
compared to the presence of a profit-maximizing platform. Importantly, even when the supplier and the
retailer are priced out of the second period, they can
still be better off. These are important insights that
suggest that supply chain partners could, and should,
be engaged in facilitating such frictionless platforms
for their consumers to trade mismatched goods.
6.2. Strategic Waiting by Consumers
Thus far, we have assumed that consumers are forward-looking in that they take future payoff into consideration. Another aspect of forward-looking
behavior is strategic waiting. There is a significant
body of literature that addresses pricing and inventory decisions in the presence of strategic consumers
(see, e.g., reviews by Aviv et al. (2009) and Chen and
Chen (2015)). In this section, we explore the effect of
consumers’ strategic waiting as a P2P platform is
introduced. A key simplifying assumption when considering strategic consumers is that the retailer commits to a pricing strategy before the first period starts.
In particular, we assume that exact prices are
unknown, but consumers know if the second period
price will be lower or higher than the first. Knowing
this relative price commitment a priori, either eliminates (second period price higher) or induces (second
period price lower) strategic waiting.

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty
Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

Let us consider first the benchmark case (i.e., no
P2P platform). To capture consumers’ strategic waiting, in this case, we assume that in the first period,
consumers choose between buying the new good
right away or defer and purchase a new good in the
second period. When they wait, they incur utility loss
from not using the product in the first period, captured by a factor c 2 [0,1]. Thus, in the first period,
consumers compare the expected utility from buying
right now, hv  p1n , with the expected utility from
waiting, cðhv  p2n Þ.15 We have the following intuitive
result (which is provided without a proof):
PROPOSITION 1. In the absence of a P2P platform, the
retailer commits to a decreasing prices trajectory. That is,
the retailer encourages strategic waiting.
The intuition is rather simple: by encountering strategic consumers again in the second period, the retailer
is rewarded with a second opportunity to sell the
goods to these consumers. This allows the retailer to
price-discriminate between consumers. Traditional
inter-temporal models generally suggest that in the
presence of strategic consumers the retailer is better off
by (credibly) committing to a fixed price (to eliminate
the inter-temporal competition)—the discussion on
this aspect dates back to the seminal paper by Coase
(1972). However, in our setting, since there is a new
cohort of consumers who arrive in the second period,
they serve as a counter balance against dropping the
price too severely in the second period and allow the
retailer to take advantage of the segmentation offered
via the inter-temporal price discrimination.
We now turn our attention to the effect induced by
the P2P platform. To capture consumers’ strategic
waiting, in this case, we assume that in the first period, consumers choose between buying the new good
right away, and having the chance of selling it on the
platform, or defer and purchase a new good in the
second period. Similar to the earlier scenario, the loss
from not using the product in the first period is
models via c 2 [0,1]. Thus, in the first period, consumers compare the expected utility from buying right
now with the chance of returning, hv þ ð1  hÞ
ðp2p  tÞ  p1n , with the expected utility from waiting,
cðhv  p2n Þ. Recall from our analysis in section 5 that
in the absence of strategic waiting the retailer benefits
from the emergence of a P2P platform when the product’s unit cost is sufficiently high (as a function of
other model’s parameters). With consumers’ strategic
waiting, two natural questions arise: 1. Can the retailer be better off when consumes strategically wait? 2.
Does the presence of a platform still benefit the retailer? Our observations below, derived based on
numerical simulations, address the two questions
above.

519

OBSERVATION 1. The retailer encourages strategic waiting when either h or c are sufficiently high.
Figure 6a reveals the platform’s competitive pressure on the retailer in the second period hurts the
retailer’s capacity to exercise inter-temporal price
segmentation between consumers. However, we
still find a wide range of parameters’ values where
the retailer encourages strategic waiting, thereby
making the retailer better off. In particular, with a
high h, consumers are less likely to experience a
mismatch and trade their goods through the platform, implying a limited competitive threat from
the platform. Hence, with a high h, the retailer still
prefers to practice inter-temporal price segmentation. When c is high, a similar argument emerges:
the selling price of the good is high, limiting the
market for used goods in the second period, again,
allowing the retailer to benefit from inter-temporal
price segmentation.
OBSERVATION 2. The emergence of a P2P platform,
benefits the retailer when either h is sufficiently low or c
is sufficiently high.
This observation is demonstrated in Figure 6b.
Importantly, the range of parameters values under
which the retailer is better off due to a P2P platforms
seems to be extended to include a wider range of h
values, as compared to the case where consumers do
not exhibit strategic waiting. When c is sufficiently
high, the same intuition applies as when consumers do
not exhibit strategic waiting. With a low h the retailer
also benefits from the platform as it provides consumers with a channel to trade their mismatched
goods with the added advantage of inter-temporal
pricing segmentation. Namely, the platform allows
the retailer to improve the segmentation of the consumers who arrive in the first period as now the
consumers have the opportunity to trade goods in
the latter period, and this benefit outweighs the
competition imposed by the platform goods since
the overall amount of goods traded is relatively low.

7. Conclusion
The development of P2P platforms has changed traditional retailing. Our study fills a gap in the literature
by incorporating a P2P platform as a decision maker,
setting its own profit maximizing transaction fee, and
while accounting for consumers’ valuation uncertainty about goods. We show in this study that when
consumers’ valuation uncertainty is present, a P2P
platform can mitigate some of the risk by allowing
consumers to trade their used goods, however, at the
same time, used goods on the platform also compete

520

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty
Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

Figure 6 The Effect of Consumers’ Strategic Waiting on the Retailer, c=0.5, d=0.5

(a)

Pricing commitment facing a P2P

with new goods from supply chain partners. Specifically, our model shows that when a product’s unit
cost is low, a P2P platform sets the transaction fee
equal to the market-clearing price. Thus, the platform
extracts all the surplus from consumers who sells
their unwanted goods, while inducing the retailer to
increase prices of the goods in the first period. Consequently, a P2P platform makes both consumers and
supply chain partners worse off relative to when it is
not present by setting the transaction fee equal to the
market-clearing price. However, as a product’s unit
cost increases, the platform no longer sets the transaction fee to equal the market-clearing price, as a result
the presence of the platform initially makes consumers better off, and as the unit cost increases further,
makes both consumers and supply chain partners better off. The intuition is simple. From consumers’
perspective, a P2P platform brings the following
trade-off: increased price of new products vs. allowing consumer to sell unwanted goods while consumers enjoy buying at a lower price in the second
period. From supply chain perspective the trade-off is
between higher prices and possibly increased
demand in the first period demand vs eroded second
period profits. Only when the unit cost is sufficiently
high, the benefit compensates the potential harm of
facing a platform, making the supply chain partners
better off. In terms of consumer surplus and social
welfare, a P2P platform can be detrimental when both
the probability of consumers having full private
valuation and the product’s unit cost are sufficiently
low. Additionally, a frictionless P2P platform generally makes the supply chain partners better off and
always makes consumers better off compared to the
benchmark scenario, when it is not present, and it

(b)

Eﬀect of P2P on the retailer

makes all agents never worse off compared to the
profit-maximizing platform scenario.
The results in this study are based on a monopolistic
model. In practice, there could be multiple suppliers
and retailers offering identical or similar products and
various P2P platforms can co-exist. Accordingly, fiercer
competition may arise along more complicated interactions among market agents. A possible extension of
the present model is to consider two or more supply
chain channels and platforms. For instance, considering the competition between Microsoft and Sony in the
video-game industry, or Staples and Office Depot, it
could be better presented by a duopolistic or oligopolistic setting. However, we believe our core insights
still apply in such setting, and our work is a necessary
first step in analyzing these, more complex, settings.
One may also consider the supply chain partners
applying Platform mitigation strategies in order to
improve their profit, such as buying out the platform,
offering refunds, limiting the information released
about products in order to increase consumer valuation uncertainty (similar to Chu and Zhang 2011), revenue-sharing with the platform and so on. If any
strategy is effective in increasing supply chain partners’ profitability is an open question and needs to be
explored further. For example, as shown in this study,
the platform can mitigate some of consumers’ valuation uncertainty, but also impose competition. If the
supply chain partners buy out the platform and operate it by themselves possibly at no charge to users, it
might not be subgame: in the second period the incentive is to shut down the platform to eliminate competition; however, they also might go the other way by
stimulating the first period demand to earn more
transaction fees. Either way, it may help them

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty

521

Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

eliminate the threat of a P2P platform and boost their
profits. Another modeling opportunity emerges from
trading sites that pay consumers upfront for their
unwanted goods. In such a channel the platform owns
the goods sold and is responsible for reselling them in
the second period. This may result with a secondary
market that does not clear the market.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank the department editor Haresh Gurnani,
senior editor and three referees for their constructive feedback and excellent suggestions that have significantly
improved this manuscript. We thank Hossein Abouee Mehrizi and Bon Koo for providing feedback on Lifei Jiang’s
MASc dissertation, the basis of this study. This research was
supported by Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council of Canada (NSERC) grants held by Stanko Dimitrov
and Benny Mantin. The research leading to these results has
received financial support from the Jean-Jacques Laffont
Digital Chair on Digital Economy at TSE and the IAST. This
manuscript has benefited from discussions with the participants of seminars held at ESMT, KLU, the University of
Groningen, University of Toledo, University of Central Florida and West Virginia University.

Appendix A. Proofs
PROOF OF LEMMA 1.
formally.

tPP

We first state the lemma

The proof of Lemma 1 follows from backwards
induction on the equilibrium decisions of the supply
chain partners and the platform. We characterize the
subgame perfect Nash equilibria for each game in
our setting. Due to non-negativity constraints on
production quantities, the transaction fee being at
most the market-clearing price, and the wholesale
price is at most the retail price, we have a large set
of cases to consider in the analysis. The complete
analysis may be found in the on-line supplement of
this manuscript.
h
PROOF OF THEOREM 1. Denote Dsc as the difference of
the entire supply chain’s profits between the benchmark scenario and the profit-maximizing platform
Q
Q
Q
Q
scenario, that is, Dsc ¼ BS þ BR  PS  PR .
We then consider Dsc in each of the segments
defined earlier in Lemma 1.
dD2

When c  c1 , Dsc is convex in c since d2 scc  0. Also,
when dDsc =dc ¼ 0, minimum Dsc ¼ 0 is achieved at
c ¼ h  c1 . So Dsc is convexly decreasing when c  c1
and Dsc jc¼c1 [ 0 for all 0 ≤ h ≤ 1.
dD2
When c1 \c  c2 , Dsc is convex in c since d2 csc  0.
Also when Dsc ¼ 0, c ¼ ~csc or ~c0sc , where c1 \~csc  c2
and ~c0sc  h. Therefore, ~c0sc is infeasible because of violation of individual rationality, c<h. Hence, if c  ~csc ,
Dsc  0; otherwise, Dsc \0.

8
dðdð1  hÞ2 ð33dh þ 7dc  84h  4cÞ  8dhð1  hÞð1  cÞ  32hðh  cÞ  64ðh þ cÞÞ
>
>
>
>
>
8ðdð1  hÞ2 ð5d  12Þ  16Þ
>
>
>
<
dð1  hÞð3h þ 5cÞ þ 8ðh  cÞ
¼
>
16ð1  hÞ
>
>
>
>
2
2
>
>
d ð1  hÞ ð15h  7cÞ þ 8ðh  cÞð7dh  4dh2  3d  4Þ
>
:
8dð1  hÞ2

if c  c1 ;
if c1 \c  c2 ;
if c [ c2 :

The corresponding supply chain’s decisions are given by the following:


8
128ðh þ cÞ þ ð1  hÞA hð1  dð1  hÞqPR
>
1n Þ þ c
>
;
>
<
2
32ð8  dð1  hÞ2 ð3d  8ÞÞ
PS
PS
fw1n ; w2n g ¼ 

2
>
PP
>
> dð1  hÞðð1  hÞð5dh þ 8c  4h  dc  4t Þ þ 4h Þ  8ðh  cÞ ; hð1  dð1  hÞqPR Þ
:
1n
4dð1  hÞ

if c  c2 ;
if c [ c2 ;

where
A ¼ dð1  hÞðð1  hÞð8ð7d  16ÞtPP  11d2 c  56dh2  45d2 hÞ þ 128ðh þ cÞ  8dð7h2 þ 3c þ 2hcÞÞ þ 16ðdc þ 7dh  8tPP Þ.
8

PS
PP
>
8ðwPS
 hÞ  dð1  hÞð5h þ 3cÞ hð1  dð1  hÞqPR
>
1n Þ  w2n
1n þ ð1  hÞt
>
;
if c  c2 ; :
>
 <

2h
hðdð1  hÞ2 ð5d  16Þ  16Þ
PR PR
¼ 
q1n ; q2n

>
>
hc
>
>
;
0
if c [ c2 :
:
dhð1  hÞ

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty

522

Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society
dD2

When c [ c2 , Dsc is concave in c since d2 csc  0.
Also, when dDsc =dc ¼ 0, maximum Dsc ¼ 0 is
achieved at c ¼ h  c2 . So Dsc is concavely increasing
when c [ c2 and Dsc jc¼c2 \0 for any 0 ≤ h ≤ 1.
h
PROOF OF THEOREM 2. Denote Dcs as the difference of
consumer surplus between the benchmark scenario
and the profit-maximizing platform scenario, that is,
R1 B
R1 B
Dcs ¼ CSB  CSP , where CSB ¼ vB U1n
dv þ vB U2n
dv,
1
2
P
R
R
R

v
1
1
P
P
P
dv þ vP2p U2n
dv þ vP U2p
dv. We then
CSP ¼ vP U1n
1

p

2p

consider Dcs in each of the segments defined earlier
in Lemma 1.
dD2
When c  c1 , solving d2 csc ¼ 0 reveals a threshold
value, ~
h, such that when h  ~
h, Dcs is concave in c since
dD2cs

0.
Also,
when
dD
=dc
¼ 0, maximum Dcs is
cs
d2 c
achieved at c ¼ h  c1 . So Dcs is concavely increasing
when c\c1 , h  ~
h, and Dcs jc¼c1 \0 for all 0  h  ~h.2
dD
When c1 \c  c2 , Dcs is convex in c since d2 ccs  0.
Also when dDcs =dc ¼ 0, the global minimum Dcs \0
is achieved at c0 2 ½c1 ; c2 . Solving Dcs ¼ 0 reveals two
threshold values, ~ccs and ~c0cs , where ~ccs  c1 if h  ~h,
~ccs [ c1 otherwise; and ~c0cs  c2 .
dD2
When c [ c2 , Dcs is concave in c since d2 ccs  0.
Also, when dD/dw=0, maximum Dcs ¼ 0 is achieved
at c ¼ h  c2 . So Dcs is concavely increasing when
c [ c2 and Dcs jc¼h ¼ 0 for any 0 ≤ h ≤ 1.
h
PROOF OF THEOREM 3. Denote Dsw as the difference
of social welfare between the benchmark scenario
and the
platform
Q profit-maximizing
Q
Q
Q scenario, that
Q is,
Dsw ¼ BS þ BR þCSB  ð PS þ PR þCSP þ PP Þ.
We then consider Dsw in each of the segments
defined earlier in Lemma 1.
dD2
When c  c1 , Dsw is convex in c since d2swc  0. Solving Dsw jc¼0 ¼ 0 for h reveals a threshold value, ~
h0 , such
0
that Dsw jc¼0  0 if h  ~
h , Dsw jc¼0 [ 0 otherwise. Solving
Dsw jc¼c1 ¼ 0 for h reveals another threshold value, ~h00 ,
h00 , Dsw jc¼c1 [ 0 otherwise,
such that Dsw jc¼c1  0 if h  ~
0
00
h . Therefore, when h\~
h0 , there exists a
where ~
h ~
threshold value of c, ~csw 2 ½0; c1 , making Dsw ¼ 0.2
dD
When c1 \c  c2 , Dsw is convex in c since d2swc  0.
Solving Dsw jc¼c1 ¼ 0 for h reveals a threshold value, ~h00 ,
h00 , Dsw jc¼c1 [ 0 otherwise,
such that Dsw jc¼c1  0 if h  ~
h0 . Also Dsw j
 0 for any 0 ≤ h ≤ 1,
where ~
h00  ~
c¼c2

0 ≤ d ≤ 1. Therefore, when h\~
h00 , there exists a threshold value of c, ~csw 2 ðc1 ; c2 , making Dsw ¼ 0.
dD2
When c [ c2 , Dsw is convex in c since d2swc  0.
Dsw jc¼c2  0 for any 0 ≤ h ≤ 1, 0 ≤ d ≤ 1. Also,
Dsw jc¼h ¼ 0 for any 0 ≤ h ≤ 1, 0 ≤ d ≤ 1.
h

PROOF OF THEOREM 4. The proof follows the same
steps as in the proofs of Theorems 2 and 3. The complete proof is provided in the Online Supplement. h

Notes
1

See, for example, http://www.china-mike.com/china-travel-tips/shopping-guide/, accessed 11/11/2015.
2
A research stream has evolved to address optimal
restocking fees which can control consumer returns and
segment the market, and which may change based on
supply chain as well as competitive considerations (see,
for example, Shulman et al. 2009, 2010, 2011).
3
A recent survey in the UK revealed that “around half of those
who were refused a refund were told it was because they didn’t
have the receipt” and a little over 70% of those surveyed experienced problems getting an instore refund (Lezemore 2010).
4
A systematic search on Kijiji.ca, an online frictionless P2P
platform similar to Craigslist, found 4–8% of listings, category dependent, are “brand new in the box” (or “brand
new with tags” for apparel) as described by the seller.
This number increased to 10–20% if we only considered
“brand new” items.
5
Marketplaces are usually operated by a platform and we
use the terms P2P marketplace and P2P platform interchangeably throughout this study.
6
In the Online Supplement, we demonstrate that a percentage fee yields qualitatively similar insights.
7
To implement the fee structure emerging from our analysis,
the platform operator can, for example, set a fee that changes
with the product category. Thus, the insights behind our
results can help explaining Amazon’s Marketplace transaction fee structure, which is open to individual sellers.
8
This notion of consumer forward looking behavior is different than that assumed in dynamic pricing models. Specifically, consumers are not engaged in the dynamic
decision of whether to purchase the good right now or
postpone the decision to a later period (an aspect that is
explored later in section 6.2). In our model, consumers
decide whether to purchase the good right now or not at
all. The rational behavior comes into play by capturing
their expectations about the actual valuation for the good
and the money they can recoup in case their valuation risk
materializes and they resell the good through the secondary market, if one is available.
9
In our setting, due to the deterministic nature of the
model, prices and quantities are equivalent: once the
quantity is determined, the price follows immediately.
10
Note that in our setting we maintain the same level of
uncertainty about the product fit in both periods as the
demand in the second period stems from a new cohort of
consumers. One might consider an alternative approach
where the uncertainty in the second period is alleviated. In
the absence of late season uncertainty, holding everything
else fixed, the (expected) consumer surplus may increase.
Accordingly, the demand for the goods increases and we
expect both prices in the late season to increase as well.
With higher second period prices, consumers can recoup
more of their loss in an event of mismatch, resulting with
the retailer raising the price in the first period as well. This
certainly benefits the supply chain partners. Indeed, as
uncertainty is alleviated, the valuation for the good may
change: if it increases universally, it further amplifies the
intuitions above, while if it decreases universally, then it
moderates, or even reverse, the intuitions above.

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty
Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society
11

We also explored other fee structures for the platform.
An analysis with zero transaction fee, representing a frictionless secondary market, is discussed later in section 6.1
of this study. Percentage transaction fee, which is adopted
by a number of P2P platforms, is studied in the Online
Supplement that accompanies this manuscript. The results
suggest that the insights do not change as one adopts a
percentage rather than a fixed fee. This observation is consistent with that of Chen et al. (2013) who state that with
a percentage fee “the results are qualitatively and quantitatively very similar to those from our baseline specification” where they use a fixed transaction fee. In their
model the transaction fee is merely a friction cost as they
assume away the platform.
12
PS
We find that wPS
2n  w1n in the platform scenario, section
4.2. Accordingly retailers have no incentive to hold inventory.
Therefore, we abstract away from the issue of strategic inventories (see, e.g., Anand et al. (2008), Hartwig et al. (2015)).
13
In the Online Supplement that accompanies this manuscript we discuss the implication of switching from an
additive transaction fee to a multiplicative transaction fee.
14
Although we do not provide visual illustration of Theorem 4 qualitatively, ^h behaves very similarly as ~h in Figure 5.
15
In practice, some consumers may wait to purchase a
used good in the second period. We assume that such
behavior is very limited as it relies on other consumers
experiencing a mismatch and hence can be ignored.

References
Anand, K., R. Anupindi, Y. Bassok. 2008. Strategic inventories in
vertical contracts. Management Sci. 54(10): 1792–1804.
AP. 2014. Clothing resale sites boom as more shoppers buy with
reselling in mind. New York Daily News, May 9, 2014 (accessed
May 27, 2015).
Aviv, Y., Y. Levin, M. Nediak. 2009. Counteracting strategic consumer behavior in dynamic pricing systems. Consumer-Driven
Demand and Operations Management Models, Vol. 131. Springer,
323–352.
Bhatnagar, P. 2006. Why big retailers are shuttering stores.
CNNMoney.com, January 24, 2006 (accessed May 27, 2015).
Chen, M., Z.-L. Chen. 2015. Recent developments in dynamic
pricing research: multiple products, competition, and limited
demand information. Prod. Oper. Manag. 24(5): 704–731.
Chen, J., S. Esteban, M. Shum. 2013. When do secondary markets
harm firms?. Am. Econ. Rev. 103(7): 2911–2934. ISSN 00028282.
doi:10.1257/aer.103.7.2911.
Chu, L. Y., H. Zhang. 2011. Optimal preorder strategy with endogenous information control. Management Sci. 57(6): 1055–1077.
Coase, R. H. 1972. Durability and monopoly. J. Law Econ. 15, 143.
Fay, S., J. Xie. 2010. The economics of buyer uncertainty: Advance
selling vs. probabilistic selling. Market. Sci. 29(6): 1040–1057.
Ghose, A., R. Telang, R. Krishnan. 2005. Effect of electronic secondary markets on the supply chain. J. Manage. Inf. Syst.
2(22): 91–120.
Ghose, A., M. D. Smith, R. Telang. 2006. Internet exchanges for
used books: An empirical analysis of product cannibalization
and welfare impact. Inf. Syst. Res. 17(1): 3–19.
Gopal, R. D., B. Pathak, A. K. Tripathi, F. Yin. 2006. From Fatwallet to eBay: An investigation of online deal-forums and sales
promotions. J. Retailing 82(2): 155–164. ISSN 00224359.
doi:10.1016/j.jretai.2006.02.002.

523

Grewal, D., J. Gotlieb, H. Marmorstein. 1994. The moderating
effects of message framing and source credibility on the priceperceived risk relationship. J. Consumer Res. 21: 145–153.
Gu, Z., Y. Liu. 2013. Retail Sales Advisory and Compensation in a
Distribution Channel. Working paper.
G€
um€
ußs, M., S. Ray, S. Yin, 2013. Returns policies between channel
partners for durable products. Market. Sci. 32(4): 622–643.
Hartwig, R., K. Inderfurth, A. Sadrieh, G. Voigt. 2015. Strategic
inventory and supply chain behavior. Prod. Oper. Manag.
24(8): 1329–1345.
Hsiao, L., Y. J. Chen. 2012. Returns policy and quality risk in
E-Business. Prod. Oper. Manag. 21(3): 489–503.
Johnson, J. P. 2011. Secondary markets with changing preferences.
RAND J. Econ. 42(3): 555–574. ISSN 07416261. doi:10.1111/
j.1756-2171.2011.00139.x.
Lezemore, J. 2010. Dont get stuck with unwanted items this
Christmas. http://conversation.which.co.uk/shopping/dontget-stuck-with-unwanted-items-this-christmas/
(accessed
October 30, 2015).
MacKenzie, I., C. Meyer, S. Noble. 2013. How retailers can keep
up with consumers. McKinsey & Company white paper, October
2013 (accessed May 27, 2015).
Mantin, B., H. Krishnan, T. Dhar. 2014. The strategic role of thirdparty marketplaces in retailing. Prod. Oper. Manag. 23(11):
1937–1949.
Oraiopoulos, N., M. E. Ferguson, L. B. Toktay. 2012. Relicensing as
a secondary market strategy. Management Sci. 58(5): 1022–1037.
Prasad, A., K. E. Stecke, X. Zhao. 2011. Advance selling by a
newsvendor retailer. Prod. Oper. Manag. 20(1): 129–142.
doi:10.1111/j.1937-5956.2010.01133.x.
Rochet, J.-C., J. Tirole. 2006. Two-sided markets: A progress
report. RAND J. Econ. 37(3): 645–667.
Shulman, J. D., A. T. Coughlan. 2007. Used goods, not used bads:
Profitable secondary market sales for a durable goods channel. Quant. Market. Econ. 5(2): 191–210.
Shulman, J. D., A. T. Coughlan, R. C. Savaskan. 2009. Optimal
restocking fees and information provision in an integrated
demand-supply model of product returns. Manuf. Serv. Oper.
Manag. 11(4): 577–594.
Shulman, J. D., A. T. Coughlan, R. C. Savaskan. 2010. Optimal
reverse channel structure for consumer product returns. Market. Sci. 29(6): 1071–1085.
Shulman, J. D., A. T. Coughlan, R. C. Savaskan. 2011. Managing
consumer returns in a competitive environment. Management
Sci. 57(2): 347–362.
Teo, T. S. H., Y. D. Yeong. 2003. Assessing the consumer decision
process in the digital marketplace. Omega 31(5): 349–363.
Tuttle, B. 2013. Hey Walmart, Its Hard to Make Sales When Store
Shelves Are Empty, http://business.time.com/2013/03/27/
hey-walmart-its-hard-to-make-sales-when-store-shelves-areempty/ (accessed October 26, 2015).
Wright, M. 2014. Move over ebay, facebay is just one of the new
ways to sell unwanted stuff. The Guardian, August 4, 2014 (accessed May 27, 2015).
Yin, S., S. Ray, H. Gurnani, A. Animesh. 2010. Durable products
with multiple used goods markets: Product upgrade and
retail pricing implications. Market. Sci. 29(3): 540–560.

Supporting Information
In the online appendix we first show that the range of
production cost for which a P2P platform has a positive
impact on a retailer and supplier differs for each. We next
provided an extended proof of Lemma 1. We then provide

524

Jiang, Dimitrov, and Mantin: Impact of P2P on Retailing Under Valuation Uncertainty
Production and Operations Management 26(3), pp. 509–524, © 2016 Production and Operations Management Society

a numerical analysis of the impact of a multiplicative platform transaction fee and a separate study on the impact of
a P2P platform in the presence of heterogeneous customers. We conclude this appendix with a detailed discussion of the results of our survey on how consumers use
P2P marketplaces to alleviate their valuation uncertainty.

Additional Supporting Information may be found in the
online version of this article:
Appendix S1. P2P Marketplaces and Retailing in the Presence of Consumers’ Valuation Uncertainty.

