Vol. 23, No. 11, November 2014, pp. 1937–1949
ISSN 1059-1478|EISSN 1937-5956|14|2311|1937

DOI 10.1111/poms.12203
© 2014 Production and Operations Management Society

The Strategic Role of Third-Party Marketplaces in
Retailing
Benny Mantin
Department of Management Sciences, University of Waterloo, 200 University Avenue West, Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada
bmantin@uwaterloo.ca

Harish Krishnan
Sauder School of Business, University of British Columbia, 2053 Main Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z2, Canada
krishnan@sauder.ubc.ca

Tirtha Dhar
University of Ontario Institute of Technology, Oshawa, Ontario L1H 7K4, Canada, tirtha.dhar@uoit.ca

etailers are increasingly adopting a dual-format model. In addition to acting as traditional merchants (buying and
reselling goods), these retailers provide a platform for third-party (3P) sellers to access and compete for the same customers. We investigate the strategic rationale for a retailer to introduce a 3P marketplace. Our analysis provides insights
into the growing prevalence of 3P marketplaces. We show that by committing to having an active 3P marketplace, the
retailer creates an “outside option” that improves its bargaining position in negotiations with the manufacturer. This can
explain the increasing prevalence of such marketplaces. On the other hand, the manufacturer would prefer to eliminate
the retailer’s outside option and should seek to limit or prevent sales through 3P marketplaces. This is consistent with
actions that several manufacturers have taken to limit such sales. Interestingly, if the manufacturer fails to eliminate sales
of competing products through the 3P marketplace, then the best strategy for the manufacturer is to allow the retailer to
dictate the terms of their contract. This is because a powerful retailer will rely less on its outside option in generating
profit, and therefore it will increase the fees charged to 3P sellers and soften the competition between 3P sellers and the
manufacturer. The decrease in competition will lead to an increase in the value of outside option of the manufacturer and
improve its profit. Additionally, we find that the presence of a 3P marketplace benefits consumers, but this benefit diminishes as the retailer becomes more powerful.

R

Key words: marketing channels; dual-format retailing; third-party marketplaces; internet retailing; bargaining
History: Received: April 2012; Accepted: November 2013 by Vishal Gaur, after 4 revisions.

1. Introduction
The increasing prevalence of third-party (3P) marketplaces, where 3P sellers use a platform provided by
another firm to access customers, has sparked an
interest in understanding the economics of platforms
(Rochet and Tirole 2006). Such 3P marketplacese-bay
is a prominent example—have gained in popularity
and have largely been facilitated by the growth of
electronic commerce. While e-bay is a “pure” 3P marketplace, other such marketplaces are associated with
firms that also operate a more traditional retailing
business. We refer to this business model as “dualformat” retailing.
The best known example of dual-format retailing is
the largest online retailer, Amazon. In addition to performing the traditional “merchant” function (buying
and reselling goods), Amazon provides a platform—
Amazon Marketplace—for 3P sellers to compete for

the same customers. In many product categories, a
customer shopping for a product (e.g., a camera) has
the option of buying it directly from Amazon, or
through other Amazon Marketplace sellers (as a new
or used product). Third-party transactions now
account for about 40% of Amazon’s sales (Barr 2012),
up from 30% in 2009 (Stone 2009). Amazon is not
alone in adopting this dual-format retailing model.
Other retailers that have launched a 3P platform
include Walmart (Walmart Marketplace), Sears (Marketplace at Sears), Best Buy (Best Buy Marketplace).
Barnes & Noble, and the largest Canadian bookseller,
Indigo.
While the traditional “merchant” approach to
retailing is still the dominant structure of retail markets, the growing interest in the dual-format model
raises several questions. Why would a retailer allow
3P sellers to compete with its “first-party” (1P) sales?
How do retailers benefit from the 3P marketplace? Is

1937

1938

Mantin, Krishnan, and Dhar: Strategic Role of Third-Party Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 23(11), pp. 1937–1949, © 2014 Production and Operations Management Society

it only due to the revenue that the retailer can extract
from the 3P sellers? And what about the manufacturers? Do they benefit from the 3P marketplace as well?
Within the context of online book retailing, publishers (and authors) have taken a position against dualformat retailing arguing that if “aggressive promotion
of used book sales becomes popular among Amazon’s
customers, this service will cut significantly into sales
of new titles, directly harming authors and publishers” (Frishberg 2000). Amazon’s response has been
that the two formats can complement each other and
the existence of both formats is a “service to readers
that allows them to explore new authors and areas of
interest. In that way, both authors and publishers benefit in the long run from the practice.” Ghose et al.
(2006) support this argument by empirically estimating that “used books are poor substitutes for new
books for most of Amazon’s customers,” implying
that the two formats are complements rather than
substitutes.
For many other products, however, 3P sellers offer
substitutes rather than complements. Even in the case
of new books, for example, a buyer can buy the latest
edition from Amazon or from a 3P seller. While it is
conceivable that part of the motivation for retailers to
open 3P marketplaces is to provide customers with
more choice, it is also possible that 3P marketplaces
play some other role in dual-format retailers’ overall
strategy. It has been reported (Weise 2013) that
“Walmart considers Amazon’s Marketplace platform
the e-tailer’s ‘number one weapon’.”
Anecdotal evidence suggests that Amazon uses the
3P marketplace as a bargaining chip in negotiations
with upstream channel players. For example, in a dispute with Hachette Group, Britain’s largest publisher,
Amazon removed the “buy new” button for Hachette’s books with only 3P (used) copies being offered
for sale (Alberge 2008). According to Paul Aiken,
executive director of the Authors Guild, “[t]he buy
button is their [Amazon’s] weapon of choice and
that’s how they impose market discipline” (Carvajal
2008).
We investigate the strategic rationale for retailers to
introduce a 3P marketplace, by addressing the following questions: how does the introduction of a 3P marketplace alter the outcome of the bargaining game
between a manufacturer and the retailer and how
does it affect their profits? To do so, we develop a stylized model of bargaining between the retailer and the
manufacturer. Because we are interested in the strategic role of the 3P marketplace, we assume that the
manufacturer has an alternative channel to reach consumers that is as efficient as the retailer. Hence, in the
absence of a 3P marketplace, the manufacturer’s outside option is equal to the total channel profits
and the retailer’s outside option is zero. Under the

corresponding bargaining equilibrium with no 3P
marketplace, the retailer would earn zero profit.
Introducing a 3P marketplace has several immediate effects. First, it improves the outside option for the
retailer—by creating a revenue stream for the retailer
that is separate from sales of the manufacturer’s product. Second, it reduces the manufacturer’s outside
option by creating downstream competition for 1P
sales. Third, it reduces total profits as 3P sales cannibalize sales of the manufacturer’s product. Yet,
because the 3P marketplace increases the retailer’s
position vs. the manufacturer in the bargaining game,
the retailer has an incentive to open a 3P marketplace.
Lastly, a 3P marketplace benefits consumers due to
the introduction of downstream competition.
A surprising result is that, when it exists, the 3P
marketplace neutralizes the manufacturer’s bargaining power: the manufacturer’s profit increases with
the retailer’s bargaining power.1 This is because retail
profit depends both on the retailer’s share of the joint
profit from selling the manufacturer’s product and
the profit generated from the 3P marketplace. A
“powerful” retailer will, in equilibrium, focus more
on strategies to maximize joint profit, while a “weak”
retailer will focus more on strategies to maximize its
outside option. Any retail strategy that maximizes
joint profit will, in this setting, also help the manufacturer because such strategies lessen competition
between the manufacturer and the 3P marketplace.
This implies that in a market where the retailer controls a 3P marketplace, the manufacturer will be better
off by letting the retailer set the terms of the contract.
Note that even a retailer with high bargaining
power would not want to shut down the 3P marketplace. By shutting down the 3P marketplace, the
retailer is giving up its outside option. Thus, even
“powerful” retailers—such as Amazon and Walmart
—strategically benefit by operating a 3P marketplace.
Overall, our results indicate that 3P marketplaces
benefit retailers and hurt manufacturers by altering
the outside options in the retailer–manufacturer bargaining game. These results can help explain the
increasing adoption of 3P marketplaces by retailers.
Conversely, our results also imply that manufacturers
will be better off if they can prevent 3P sales on the
retailer’s marketplace. Recently, Adidas banned 3P
sellers from re-selling its products on Amazon (Barr
2012). Other brand-name shoe manufacturers, including Nike and Asics, have followed suit (Miller 2012).
Barr (2012) also reports that the German chef knife
maker W€
usthof has stopped selling goods on Amazon
because W€
usthof did not want third-parties selling its
goods. Swiss Gourmet, a distributor of Swiss
Diamond cookware, has also “threatened to pull out
unless Amazon limits discounting and cracks
down on unauthorized 3P sellers.” (In some cases,

Mantin, Krishnan, and Dhar: Strategic Role of Third-Party Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 23(11), pp. 1937–1949, © 2014 Production and Operations Management Society

manufacturers explicitly forbid sales through 3P
channels. Resellers who violate this prohibition and
list their products on 3P platforms are therefore
“unauthorized” sellers). In addition, Barr (2012)
reports that “Ralph Lauren Corp, Hugo Boss AG and
Guess Inc have all protested recently about unauthorized sellers” on the 3P marketplace.2
The concerns manufacturers have raised about 3P
sellers are that (1) counterfeit products may be sold
on the 3P marketplace, damaging the brand reputation, and that (2) the presence of 3P sellers creates
price competition for the brands. It is possible that the
former concern is a significant issue for some brands,
and this is an issue we do not model in this paper.
The latter issue of price competition is central to our
model and results. It is this competition that changes
the outside options in the bargaining game.
Our results are consistent with the observation that
manufacturers would want to limit competition from
3P sellers. Also, our model predicts that Amazon
would not want to limit 3P sales. This is what we
observe in practice. According to Barr (2012), “the
brands want Amazon to help them weed out such
sellers, but the online retailer prefers not to get
involved, according to industry executives. [. . .] Amazon has little incentive to discipline sellers because it
takes a cut of 3P sales through its lucrative 3P marketplace, these executives say.” For example, when
W€
usthof complained, “Amazon told W€
usthof to crack
down on these 3P sellers itself.”
The argument made above—that Amazon does not
have the incentive to discipline sellers because of the
revenue it earns from these sellers—is, according to
our analysis, only partially correct. Amazon does earn
revenue from these 3P sellers, but our results imply
that the more significant reason for maintaining a 3P
marketplace is the impact that this has on the outside
options of the retailer and the manufacturer in the
bargaining game. It is the impact on the off-equilibrium path that is more important—rather than the
revenues that are directly earned in equilibrium. And,
as we have argued above, Amazon has been willing
to stop carrying a manufacturer’s product—and only
sell 3P products—as a way to signal to manufacturers
that the 3P marketplace represents a credible threat.
In other words, there is a strategic rationale for maintaining a 3P marketplace—which has not been examined before this paper.

2. Related Literature
The result that retailers introduce downstream competition as a way to increase their bargaining position
is not new. Narasimhan and Wilcox (1998) argue that
retailers introduce private label products in a category
to elicit concessions from the manufacturer(s) of

1939

branded products in that category. If customers are
more willing to switch to the private label, the retailer
can extract more concessions from the branded manufacturer. Morton and Zettelmeyer (2004) also note that
retailers “list bargaining with manufacturers as one of
the prime benefits of introducing private labels in a
category.” They go on to demonstrate that a retailer
introducing a store brand would want it to imitate,
and therefore compete aggressively with, the national
brand. We add to these insights by showing that a
retailer-controlled 3P marketplace can similarly
weaken the upstream monopolist’s ability to extract
profits from a downstream retailer.
Our result, that a manufacturer facing a dual-format retailer prefers that the retailer has high bargaining power, is also reflected in some other papers that
discuss the value in having a powerful channel partner. In an asymmetric information context (the retailer
has better information than manufacturer), Iyer and
Villas-Boas (2003) have shown that it is better for the
manufacturer to let the retailer be powerful in the bargaining process. In their case, the powerful retailer
can leverage its information to generate a better outcome for both channel players. Similarly, Dukes et al.
(2006), using an upstream oligopoly setup, have
shown that it is better for the dominant manufacturer
(in terms of market share) to have a powerful downstream retailer. Feng and Lu (2012) consider a model
of bargaining between supplier and downstream
manufacturers. In their model, because the supplier is
negotiating with two manufacturers, its share of profit
from trading with one manufacturer affects the profit
that can be earned from the other manufacturer. In
such an interaction, a manufacturer’s profit may
decrease as its bargaining power increases.
Another context where upstream manufacturers
prefer downstream retailers to have more decision
making authority is in the “strategic delegation” literature (e.g., Gilbert et al. 2006, Liu and Tyagi 2011,
McGuire and Staelin 1983). In that stream of literature, a manufacturer can soften competition (with
another manufacturer) by delegating the pricing function to a downstream retailer and by raising the
wholesale price above marginal cost. However, while
the competition-softening effect in this set of papers
arise from decentralization, in our model, it arises
from the increase in the retailer’s bargaining power.
Our contribution is to emphasize how an increase in
the retailer’s bargaining power softens competition
and how a dual-format retailer can use its ability to
soften competition as a way to extract bargaining
power from an upstream manufacturer.
While there is limited work on 3P marketplaces in
the marketing and operations literatures, two issues
relating to 3P marketplaces have been studied.
Jiang et al. (2011) note that an important benefit of

1940

Mantin, Krishnan, and Dhar: Strategic Role of Third-Party Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 23(11), pp. 1937–1949, © 2014 Production and Operations Management Society

dual-format retailing is that it allows the retailer to
learn about the demand for the “long-tail” products
sold on its 3P marketplace. The retailer may then
cherry-pick the successful products to stock and sell
by itself. Our paper sets aside the benefits of learning
about demand, and instead focuses on the impact of
the 3P marketplace on the bargaining game. Ryan
et al. (2012) consider the problem facing an independent retailer, selling a product through its own website, who may also choose to also sell its product as a
3P seller on another retailer’s marketplace. This
expands the market for the retailer, but the cost is that
the retailer pays a fixed participation fee or shares
revenue with the other retailer. The question Ryan
et al. (2012) address is, under what conditions should
the retailer sell through the marketplace system. Their
focus is on the strategic decisions of a 3P seller while,
in our paper, 3P retailers are modeled as price takers.
The questions we address in this paper—the impact
of a 3P marketplace on the retailer, manufacturer and
consumers—have not been studied in the literature.

3. Analytical Model
Our stylized model of a dual-format retailer considers
two vertically differentiated products. The retailer
sells the manufacturer’s product; we refer to this as
1P sales and denote this product by the subscript 1. In
addition, 3P sellers sell a substitutable product and
this product is denoted by the subscript 3. For example, the 1P product may be “new” and the 3P product
could be “used.” Even if both products are “new,” we
assume that the 3P sellers provide a product that is
perceived as having lower quality (e.g., in delivery
lead time) as compared with the 1P product. We
assume that the 3P product’s quality does not vary by
the seller, i.e., all products sold through the 3P marketplace are identical. The model therefore has four
types of players: the consumers, the retailer, the manufacturer, and the 3P sellers. We describe each in
detail below.
3.1. Consumers
Adopting the Mussa and Rosen (1978) consumer utility
model, consumers’ income (or their willingness to pay)
is denoted by i and is uniformly distributed between
zero and one. The utility that consumer i gets from the
1P product is Ui1 = i  p1 and the utility this consumer
gets from the 3P product is Ui3 = ia  p3, where the 1P
product is offered for a price of p1, the 3P product is
sold for p3, and a < 1 denotes the quality of the 3P product. (The product quality of the 1P is normalized to
one). Consumers purchase the product that provides
them with the most utility, as long as this is positive.
The marginal consumer who is indifferent between
purchasing and not purchasing either product is

located at i ¼ pa3 , and the marginal consumer who is
indifferent between purchasing the higher quality 1P
product or the lower quality 3P product is located at
1 p3
. We focus attention only on markets where
i ¼ p1a
0 < i* < i** < 1, to guarantee existence of both 1P and
3P products. Based on this utility model, the demand
expressions for the 1P and 3P products are
q1 ¼ 1 

p1  p3
1a

and

q3 ¼

p1  p3 p3
 ;
1a
a

ð1Þ

respectively, and the inverse demand functions are
p1 ¼ 1  q1  aq3

and

p3 ¼ að1  q3  q1 Þ: ð2Þ

From Equation (2), it can be verified that p3 < p1
since a < 1.
3.2. Third-Party Sellers
The 3P sellers are modeled as a competitive fringe.
Each 3P seller is a price taker and makes zero profit.
The retailer charges the 3P sellers a per-unit transaction fee of T ≥ 0 for each product sold on the 3P marketplace. In our stylized model, because sellers earn
zero profits, it is sufficient to consider a per-unit fee
alone. The model can be generalized to account for a
revenue share in addition to a per-unit fee, and the
basic insights of the paper follow through.3
For simplicity, we normalize the per-unit cost of the
3P product to zero. Third-party sellers need to satisfy
the following zero-profit condition: Π3 = p3q3 
Tq3 = 0. Thus, we have that p3 = T, i.e., the 3P product
price is determined by the transaction fee. This marketplace transaction fee, T, is a key strategic decision
for the dual-format retailer in our model. On one
hand, this fee helps to extract surplus from the 3P sellers and, on the other hand (as explained below), the
fee also influences the supply of the 1P product.
3.3. Manufacturer, Retailer and Bargaining
There are two stages in the game between the manufacturer and the retailer. In Stage 1, the retailer commits to the per-unit marketplace transaction fee, T, for
3P sellers. In Stage 2, the manufacturer and the retailer bargain over the quantity of the 1P product brought
to the market, q1, and the wholesale price, w1, to be
paid by the retailer to the manufacturer for each unit
purchased. The timing of the events is depicted in Figure 1. The bargaining game in Stage 2 is modeled as a
standard Nash bargaining problem (see Muthoo
(1999) for more details).
Let k be the bargaining power parameter of the retailer; the manufacturer’s bargaining power is 1  k.4
The retailer’s outside option, if bargaining fails, is DR;
the manufacturer’s outside option is DM.5 We define c1
to be the per-unit production cost (incurred by the
manufacturer) for the 1P product. In our analysis, we

Mantin, Krishnan, and Dhar: Strategic Role of Third-Party Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 23(11), pp. 1937–1949, © 2014 Production and Operations Management Society

Figure 1

Timeline of the Game

Stage 1:
Retailer’s commitment

The retailer
sets T

Stage 2:
Bargaining process

Bargaining over
q1 and w1
takes place

normalize this cost to zero.6 Let ΠR and ΠM denote the
profit of the retailer and the manufacturer, respectively, if the bargaining process is successful.
Bargaining between the retailer and the manufacturer is over total quantity and wholesale price,
(q1, w1), of the 1P product. Unlike in a wholesale-pricing only contract, this contract design will lead to vertical coordination. This is due to the double
marginalization, which arises in a wholesale-price
only setting, is eliminated because the firms also contract on the total quantity.7
The Nash bargaining solution with this quantity
forcing contract is the pair of q1 and w1 which solves:
maxq1 ;w1 ½ ln ðPR  DR Þ þ ð1  Þ ln ðPM  DM Þ;
s.t. PR  DR and PM  DM

ð3Þ

We define Π  ΠR + ΠM  DR  DM as the gains
from trade. If bargaining is successful, the retailer
purchases q1 units and pays a total of w1q1 = (1  k)Π
to the manufacturer, and gets to keep kΠ. The equilibrium profit expressions can be written as:
PR ¼ DR þ P and

1941

PM ¼ DM þ ð1  ÞP:

ð4Þ

In traditional bargaining models, the outside
options of both players are exogenously determined
and constants. This can be interpreted as the firms
exiting the market and pursuing other options. When
the outside options of the retailer and the manufacturer are determined exogenously, then the interests
of both players are aligned: the profits of both the
retailer and the manufacturer are fixed fractions of
their gains from trade. In our model, if bargaining
fails, the retailer and the manufacturer continue to
operate, but compete against each other in the same
market. The manufacturer sells its product through
an alternative channel, and the retailer only operates
the 3P marketplace. The outside options are therefore
the profits the two firms will earn in this setting.
We assume that the manufacturer’s alternative
channel provides the same profit that can be earned

If bargaining fails: manufacturer
sells its products independently;
retailer only sells platform products

from 1P sales. This implies two things: (1) the manufacturer’s alternative channel is as efficient as selling
through the retailer, i.e., the manufacturer does not
incur a higher costs when selling directly to customers and (2) customers perceive the quality of the good
to be same, whether it is sold directly by the manufacturer or as 1P sales by the retailer. In practice, this
assumption is questionable.8 But, by giving the manufacturer this advantage, this assumption helps us to
focus on the strategic role of the 3P marketplace by
allowing us to highlight how the retailer benefits from
having a 3P marketplace.
We also assume that, irrespective of the outcome of
the bargaining game, the retailer remains contractually committed to the per-unit marketplace transaction fee, T, that was initially offered to the 3P sellers.
This is because of the difficulty inherent in negotiating and renegotiating contracts with multiple 3P sellers. In practice, Amazon does commit to the payment
terms that are set for the 3P sellers.9

4. Analysis
We solve the two-stage game by backward induction.
The solution to Stage 2, the bargaining game between
the retailer and manufacturer, itself requires two
steps: we first solve for both firms’ outside options
and then we solve for the bargaining outcome.
Throughout the analysis, we let the superscript O
denote the outside options outcomes and the superscript B denote the outcomes when the bargaining
process is successful.
When solving for the outside options, the manufacturer (who is now selling its product independent of
the retailer) is competing with the 3P sellers and sets
its outside option price, pO
1 , appropriately. During
bargaining, the firms take the outside options profits
and the 3P price determined in Stage 1 to jointly
decide the optimal quantity (and therefore price) of
the 1P product. Finally, in Stage 1, the retailer considers the outcome of the Stage 2 bargaining game to
optimally choose the 3P price, T.

Mantin, Krishnan, and Dhar: Strategic Role of Third-Party Marketplaces

1942

Production and Operations Management 23(11), pp. 1937–1949, © 2014 Production and Operations Management Society

4.1. Stage 2: Analysis of the Bargaining Process
First consider the two firms’ outside options. If bargaining fails, the retailer’s outside option profit is
DR ¼ TqO
3 and the manufacturer’s outside option
O
profit is DM ¼ pO
1 q1 . The price of the 3P product is
the predetermined transaction fee, i.e., pO
3 ¼ T. The
O
manufacturer chooses p1 to maximize DM, i.e.,
1
O
O
pO
1 ¼ 2 ð1  a þ TÞ. Plugging the values of p3 and p1
into (1), the quantities of the two products are
aa2 þaT2T
1aþT
qO
and qO
1 ¼ 2ð1aÞ . Note that as the price
3 ¼
2ð1aÞa
for the 3P product increases, 1P sales increase even
though the price of the 1P product is also increasing.
Also note that to ensure non-negative 3P sales in
að1aÞ
the outside option, qO
3  0, we need T  2a .
Based on this, the outside option profits are:
2

and DM ¼ ð1aþTÞ
DR ¼ Tðað1aÞþTða2ÞÞ
4ð1aÞ .
2ð1aÞa
Taking these outside option profits, we can find the
outcome of the bargaining process by maximizing
k ln (ΠR  DR) + (1  k) ln (ΠMDM) to obtain the
pair qB1 and w1 (see Equation (3)), where qB1 is the
quantity of the manufacturer’s product under
the bargaining solution. The retailer’s profit under the
bargaining outcome is the revenue from the 3P product market (TqB3 ) plus the profit from the manufacturer’s product (pB1 qB1 ) less the transfer amount to the
manufacturer (w1 qB1 ). Hence, the retailer’s profit is
PR ¼ TqB3 þ pB1 qB1  w1 qB1 . The manufacturer’s profit
is simply the transfer amount, i.e., PM ¼ w1 qB1 .
In the bargaining solution, the retailer and the manufacturer will set the wholesale price to be
w1 ¼

T2 ð2  Þ þ Tð2  2aÞ þ 1þa2 2a
2ð1aÞ

and the quantity of the

manufacturer’s product to be qB1 ¼ 12. Hence, the
retailer pays the manufacturer a total of
2a
. Since qB1 and pB3 are
w1 qB1 ¼ T ð2ÞþTð22aÞþ1þa
4ð1aÞ
known, the equilibrium bargaining outcome is determined. The quantity of the 3P product at equilibrium
under the bargaining outcome is given by qB3 ¼ a2T
2a
and the price of the manufacturer’s product under the
bargaining outcome is pB1 ¼ 12 ð1 þ 2T  aÞ. Note that
to ensure qB3  0, we need T  a2.
The above expressions reveal that even though the
quantity of the 3P product decreases and the quantity
of the 1P product does not change as the marketplace
transaction fee goes up, the prices of both types of
products go up. The intuition is as follows: As the
marketplace transaction fee T increases, so does the
price of the 3P product and this allows the price of the
1P product to be raised.
An interesting and unexpected observation here is
that the retail price of the 1P product under bargaining, pB1 , is less than the wholesale price that the retailer
2

2

pays the manufacturer, w1. In other words, under the
bargaining outcome, the retailer loses on each sale of
the manufacturer’s product. This implies that the
retailer transfers some of the profits from the 3P marketplace to the manufacturer. However, both firms
are better off under bargaining because their profits
are at least equal to their outside options plus a fraction of the gains from trade.
Having derived the bargaining outcome, we can
now express the profits of the retailer and the manufacturer. Entering the bargaining process, the retailer’s expected profit is PR ¼ pB3 qB3 þ pB1 qB1  w1 qB1
¼

ð2aþa4ÞðTÞ2 þ2að1aÞT
,
4ð1aÞa

and the manufacturer’s profit
2

Þ
.
is given by PM ¼ w1 qB1 ¼ ð2ÞðTÞ þð22aÞTþð12aþa
4ð1aÞ
From these expressions, we can see that, for a fixed T,
the retailer’s profit is increasing in its bargaining
power k while the manufacturer’s profit is decreasing

in

k

(note

that

@PR
@

¼

aðTÞ2
4ð1aÞa

0

2

and

@PM
@

¼

2

ðTÞ
 4ð1aÞ

 0). In our model, however, T is not
arbitrarily fixed. Rather, it is chosen optimally by the
retailer in Stage 1 so as to maximize its profit. We
consider this next.
4.2. Stage 1: Choice of Marketplace Transaction
Fee by the Retailer
The retailer’s choice of the per-unit marketplace transaction fee, T, has two impacts: (1) it affects the outside
options of both the manufacturer and the retailer and
(2) it affects the total surplus when bargaining is successful. The retailer is the first mover in this game and
it commits to the marketplace transaction fee prior to
bargaining with the manufacturer. The retailer therefore sets the fee that maximizes its own profit. The
concavity of the retailer’s profit function (since
@ 2 ðPR Þ
@ðT Þ2

¼

að2þÞ4
2að1aÞ

\ 0) allows us to characterize the

optimal T for the retailer:
p3 ¼ T  ¼

að1  aÞ
;
4  ð2 þ Þa

ð5Þ

and it can be shown that for any a and k 2 (0,1),
O
T*, qB
3 and q3 are positive.
Note that the manufacturer’s profit is increasing in
2Tð2Þþ2ð1aÞ
M
 0 for T ≥ 0). In other
T (since @P
@T ¼
4ð1aÞ
words, the manufacturer prefers the retailer to set T
as high as possible, to choke-off the 3P product market. However, the manufacturer cannot eliminate the
3P marketplace under both the outside option and
bargaining outcomes.10
The optimal marketplace transaction fee set by the
retailer will determine the outside options of both
parties. Recall that the retailer’s and the manufac-

Mantin, Krishnan, and Dhar: Strategic Role of Third-Party Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 23(11), pp. 1937–1949, © 2014 Production and Operations Management Society

turer’s outside options are DR ¼ TqO
and
3
O
q
,
respectively.
Hence,
evaluating
these
D M ¼ pO
1 1
values at T = T*, we have DR ¼ ð1aÞð2aaÞa
and
2ð42aaÞ2
DM ¼

ð4aaÞ2 ð1aÞ
.
4ð42aaÞ2

Thus, for T = T*, the outside

option of the retailer is decreasing in its bargaining
power k (since
manufacturer’s

@DM
@

¼

@DR
@

is

ð1aÞð4aaÞa2
2ð42aaÞ3

a ð1aÞ
¼  2ð42aaÞ
3 \ 0), while the
3

increasing

in

k

(since

[ 0).

This implies that, with more bargaining power, the
retailer is less concerned about the outside option,
and increases the 3P product’s price (recall that it is
increasing in k), which lessens the competition
between the two products in the outside option outcome. The direct result is that the retailer’s outside
option decreases. However, at the same time, the
manufacturer’s outside option improves.
We now find expressions for the retailer’s and manufacturer’s equilibrium profits. Using Equation (4),
the equilibrium profits when T = T* are:
PR ¼
¼

ð1  aÞa
and PM
4ð4  2a  aÞ
ð1  aÞða2 ð2 þ  þ 2 Þ  8að1 þ Þ þ 16Þ
4ð2a þ a  4Þ2

ð6Þ

Based on the analysis of the bargaining game
between the manufacturer and retailer, we can now
discuss the strategic role of the 3P marketplace. We
do this in the next section.

5. The Role and Impact of the 3P
Marketplace
5.1. Profits and Consumer Surplus
To understand the role of the 3P marketplace, consider the case where the 3P marketplace does not
exist. For example, assume that 3P sellers cannot get
any supply of the products that they would like to sell
on the marketplace. When the 3P marketplace does
not exist, the retailer has no ability to influence its outside option. If bargaining between the manufacturer
and the retailer fails, the retailer’s outside option is
zero. On the other hand, the manufacturer’s outside
option is equal to the monopoly profit from selling
the 1P product (recall that the manufacturer can sell
its product just as efficiently as the retailer). Furthermore, absent the 3P marketplace, there are no gains
from trade and the manufacturer always makes
the same profit—the monopoly profit—regardless of
whether it sells through the retailer or directly to
consumers.
From the retailer’s perspective, the strategic
value of the 3P marketplace is now clear: if the 3P

1943

marketplace exists, then the retailer has an outside
option. Furthermore, because the retailer commits to
the marketplace transaction fee (and therefore to the
3P price) before bargaining with the manufacturer,
the retailer can influence the outside options of both
players and therefore can influence the outcome of
the bargaining game. The marketplace, therefore,
plays a strategic role in improving the bargaining
position of the retailer. Because the 3P marketplace
tilts the bargaining game in its favor, the retailer has
an incentive to introduce a 3P marketplace. Conversely, the 3P marketplace hurts the manufacturer.
The manufacturer would want to prevent the 3P
marketplace from carrying competing products
while the retailer has an incentive to continue carrying these products.
But what is the impact on total channel profits (producer surplus) and on consumer surplus? To answer
this question, first note that the monopoly profit that
the manufacturer would earn in the absence of the 3P
marketplace is given by p1q1 where p1 = 1q1. (This is
from the Mussa–Rosen utility model with q3 set to
zero—see section 3.1.) The manufacturer’s monopoly
price and quantity are both equal to 12, and the monopoly profit is equal to 14. This is the same profit that the
manufacturer would earn even if it sold through
the retailer. Since total channel profits are identical to
the manufacturer’s outside option, the manufacturer
keeps the entire channel profits, equal to 14, and retailer’s profit is zero.
Compare these profits with the equilibrium manufacturer and retailer bargaining profits, PR and PM ,
in Equation (6). Note also that total supply chain
profit under bargaining is PSC ¼ PR þ PM ¼
ð1aÞð16þa2 2 4að1þ2ÞÞ
að2aÞ2
¼ 14  4ð2ð2aÞaÞ
2.
4ð4að2þÞÞ2
*

Comparing chan-

nel profits under bargaining, Π , with the channel
profits without the 3P marketplace, 14, we can see that
the 3P marketplace does the following: (1) it increases
the retailer profit from zero to a positive value, PR ; (2)
it reduces the manufacturer profit from 14 to PM \ 14,
and (3) it reduces total channel profits (producer surplus) from 14 to PSC \ 14. This leads us to the following
result, which is also illustrated in Figure 2(a).
PROPOSITION 1. Introduction of the 3P marketplace
increases the retailer’s profit, decreases the manufacturer’s
profit and decreases channel profits.
The above proposition summarizes the strategic
role of the 3P marketplace. Since the retailer always
benefits from the 3P marketplace, and because the
retailer makes the decision about whether to open a
3P marketplace or not, it can explain why 3P marketplaces are being increasingly adopted by retailers like
Amazon, Walmart, Sears, Best Buy and others. Note

Mantin, Krishnan, and Dhar: Strategic Role of Third-Party Marketplaces

1944

Production and Operations Management 23(11), pp. 1937–1949, © 2014 Production and Operations Management Society

that even a retailer with a high bargaining power will
benefit from opening a 3P marketplace because,
absent the marketplace, the retailer makes zero profit.
Similarly, since 3P marketplaces reduce manufacturer
profit, it is clear that manufacturers will want to prevent 3P marketplaces by disallowing 3P sales. This is
consistent with the observation that several brandname manufacturers, including Adidas and others,
have banned 3P sales of their products. For some
manufacturers, however, preventing 3P sales may be
impossible. For example, book publishers have to
contend with used-book sales, which is much harder
to disallow.
It is also worth observing that the 3P marketplace reduces channel profits. The logic is straightforward. By creating downstream competition, the
manufacturer’s monopoly pricing power is reduced
and this leads to lower channel profits. It is possible that the manufacturer and retailer could agree
on a coordinating contract, for example one where
the retailer receives a fixed fee equal to its outside
option. The manufacturer would, in effect, pay the
retailer to forgo the 3P marketplace. But once the
retailer forgoes the 3P marketplace, the manufacturer could seek to renegotiate the contract to
avoid paying the fixed fee. In other words, for the
retailer’s outside option to be credible, the retailer
arguably needs to maintain an active 3P marketplace (and not merely hold the threat of starting
one). Also, the strategic impact of the 3P marketplace is not limited to the bargaining agents in
the channel. The effect also extends to the consumers. By increasing competition, lowering the
price of the manufacturer’s product, and increasing choice for consumers, the 3P marketplace
increases consumer surplus. This is evident from
Figure 2(b).
5.2. Impact of Retailer Bargaining Power
Figure 2(a) also illustrates an unexpected result. Note
that, when the 3P marketplace exists, both the retailer’s and the manufacturer’s profit are increasing in
the retailer’s bargaining power k. The intuition for
this result is as follows: As the retailer’s bargaining
power increases, the retailer is less concerned with
the outside option. Consequently, a retailer with high
bargaining power commits to a higher 3P product
@p

price ( @3 [ 0), which improves the channel profit as
it lessens competition between the two types of products. This pricing choice made by the powerful retailer allows the manufacturer to sell more units of its
(1P) product under the outside option outcome
@qO
M
@
@pO
( @M

(

[ 0) even as it raises the price of its product
[ 0). This improvement in the manufacturer’s

outside option is greater than the loss of profit from
the bargaining process due to its decreased bargaining power.
PROPOSITION 2. When the retailer commits to the marketplace transaction fee, T ¼ p3 , before bargaining with
the manufacturer, both the retailer’s and the manufacturer’s profits are increasing in k.
PROOF.
@PM
@

¼

@PR
@

¼

ð1aÞa2
4ð2aþa4Þ2

ð1aÞa2 ð3a2a4Þ
4ð2aþa4Þ3

[ 0 and

[ 0.

h

In other words, if the manufacturer cannot block the
3P marketplace, then the manufacturer’s bargaining
power is irrelevant. The manufacturer would be better
off by simply letting the retailer set the terms of the
contract. In other words, this result can be interpreted
to imply that, when the 3P marketplace exists, the manufacturer wants the retailer to act as the principal in
this game. We can also think in terms of the allocation
of decision rights. Our result implies that, when a 3P
marketplace exists, it is optimal for the manufacturer
to allocate the right to offer a contract to the retailer.
We next look at the impact of retailer bargaining
power on consumers. As noted earlier, the 3P marketplace increases consumer surplus. But note also that,
according to Figure 2(b), the consumer surplus is
declining with the retailer’s bargaining power, k. This
is because a more powerful retailer relies less on the
outside option and will focus, instead, on the bargaining outcome. As the retailer can extract more surplus
from the channel’s profits, it will internalize and dampen price competition, ultimately hurting consumers
(note that the surplus is constant in k when there is no
3P marketplace).
PROPOSITION 3. In the presence of a 3P marketplace,
consumer surplus is decreasing in k.

PROOF. Let CS1 and CS3 denote the consumer surplus from 1P and 3P
R 1 sales, respectively. We have
that CS1 ðp1 ; p3 ; aÞ ¼ i ði  p1 Þdi and CS3 ðp1 ; p3 ; aÞ
R i
¼ i ðia  p3 Þdi. Thus, total consumer surplus is
given by CSðp1 ; p3 ; aÞ ¼ CS1 ðp1 ; p3 ; aÞ þ CS3 ðp1 ; p3 ; aÞ
p23 2p1 p3 aþð1þp21 þ2p1 ð1þaÞaÞa
. By Equation (5), p3 ¼
2ð1aÞa
að1aÞ
T  ¼ 4ð2þÞa, and recalling that the optimal p1
under bargaining is 12 ð1 þ 2T  aÞ ¼ 12 ð1  a þ
2ð1aÞa
2ð1aÞa
we have that CSð12 ð1  a þ 4að2þÞ
Þ;
4að2þÞÞ,
3
2
2
að1aÞ
16það48Þþa ð4þ3Þþa ð412þ Þ
. The first
4ð2þÞa ; aÞ ¼
8ð4það2þÞÞ2
2
ð1þaÞa ð3þaþaÞ
, is negative (for
derivative @CS
@ ¼
ð4það2þÞÞ3

¼

0 < a < 1 and 0 < k < 1)

h

Mantin, Krishnan, and Dhar: Strategic Role of Third-Party Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 23(11), pp. 1937–1949, © 2014 Production and Operations Management Society

Figure 2

1945

Profits and Consumer Surplus With and Without a 3P Marketplace. (a) Retailer, Manufacturer and Channel Profits. (b) Consumer Surplus

(a)

This result is in contrast to the prediction of the
“countervailing-power hypothesis” (Chen 2003) that
powerful retailers will extract surplus from upstream
manufacturers and this will benefit consumers. Chen
(2003) model also has an upstream manufacturer, a
large downstream retailer and a competitive fringe of
smaller retailers. If the dominant retailer extracts
more surplus from the manufacturer, the manufacturer counters by increasing supply to the competitive
fringe which results in lower prices for customers. In
our model, the competitive fringe (i.e., 3P marketplace) is controlled by the retailer. As a result, when
the retailer’s bargaining power increases, the retailer
restricts supply of 3P products by raising fees for marketplace sellers. This hike in fees hurts 3P product
availability and thereby hurts consumer surplus.
5.3. Implications of our Results
Given the stylized nature of our model, our results
have to be interpreted with care. However, there are
some themes that emerge from the preceding discussion. For retailers, our results indicate that setting up
3P marketplaces is beneficial because it weakens the
manufacturer in the channel bargaining game by
improving the retailer’s outside option and reducing
the manufacturer’s outside option. In other words,
the reason that retailers should (and do) open 3P marketplaces is not just because of the revenue that this
brings in. But it is also the impact that the 3P marketplace has on the off-equilibrium payoffs—by chang-

(b)

ing the outside options of the two firms, the retailer
can extract more of the channel profits.
For manufacturers, especially strong brands that
have monopoly power, our results indicate that 3P
marketplaces are a source of competition that negatively affects their profit. It therefore makes sense that
manufacturers would try and prevent 3P sellers from
gaining access to its products. This is what we
observe some manufacturers doing. Some manufacturers, however, may not be able to prevent 3P sales.
As noted earlier, book publishers have limited power
to prevent used book sales. In these cases, our results
indicate that the manufacturers have no choice but to
acquiesce to the terms that the retailer sets. This follows from Proposition 2—both firms’ profits are
increasing in the retailer’s bargaining power. In other
words, if the manufacturer cannot shut down the 3P
marketplace, it is best to make peace with the retailer
and accept its terms.
Finally, from a public policy perspective, our
results indicate that 3P marketplaces are good for consumers. It weakens the pricing power of manufacturers, reduces prices, and increases choice for
consumers. This is consistent with the argument that
Amazon has made—that the reason they open 3P
marketplaces is to provide customers with more convenience and choice. Our results indicate that retailers
have a strategic interest in opening 3P marketplaces—
it places the retailer at a bargaining advantage over a
monopoly manufacturer. The positive impact that 3P

Mantin, Krishnan, and Dhar: Strategic Role of Third-Party Marketplaces

1946

Production and Operations Management 23(11), pp. 1937–1949, © 2014 Production and Operations Management Society

marketplaces have on consumers is a happy byproduct.

6. Extensions
In this section, we relax some of the assumptions of
our basic model. These extensions demonstrate that
the insights from our paper continue to hold under a
wider range of assumptions.
6.1. Two-Period Model with Used Products Sold
on the 3P Marketplace
In our basic model, we assumed that a supply of 3P
goods always exists. In practice, marketplace sellers
often sell used goods. To account for these dynamics,
we consider a two-period selling horizon with two
independent cohorts of consumers in each of the periods. In the first period, only the new product is available in the market. Some, or all, of the units sold in
the first period may be resold by the marketplace sellers in the second period as used products.11
The demand for new product in the first period as
well as the new and used products in the second period are:
q11 ¼ 1  p21 ;
q23 ¼

q21 ¼ 1 


 ;
1a
a

p21

p23

p23


;
1a

p21

p23

and

ð7Þ

respectively, where the superscripts 1 and 2 denote
the corresponding periods. Since the used products
sold in the second period are derived from the
amount of new products sold in the first period, we
further impose the following constraint: q23 \ q11 :12
The bargaining process is similar to that defined
earlier, with the exception that now the two players,
the manufacturer and the retailer, negotiate the terms
for the two periods. Prior to entering the bargaining
process, the retailer commits to the marketplace transaction fee to be charged to the fringe sellers using the
3P marketplace in the second period. The Nash bargaining solution with this quantity forcing contract is
the triplet of w1, q11 , and q21 which solves:
max ½ lnðPR  DR Þ þ ð1  Þ lnðPM  DM Þ:

w1 ;q11 ;q21

ð8Þ

Note that the retailer’s outside option consists of
profit from selling the new product in both the first
and second periods, while the retailer serves as a
platform for the used product only in the second
period.
Solving the model in the same fashion carried out
að1aÞ
in section 4, the resulting profits are PR ¼ 4ð42aaÞ
and

PM ¼

2a3 a3 2 a3 þ14a2 þ13a2 þ22 a2 40a16aþ32
,
4ð42aaÞ2

which yield the same result stated in Proposition 2.
Specifically, as in section 4, both players are better off
as the retailer has greater bargaining power.
6.2. Non-Zero Marginal Production Cost for
Manufacturer
In this section, we consider the case where the per
unit cost of the manufacturer’s product, c1, is positive.
We focus our attention only on the impact on Proposition 2. Specifically, we investigate whether the manufacturer is still better off when the retailer’s
bargaining power increases.
3a2aþ4
PROPOSITION 4. As long as c1 \ 3a 2a
, the
1210aa
manufacturer’s profit increases as the retailer’s bargaining power increases.
2

2

PROOF. Considering a marginal cost c1, the manufacturer’s outside option and profit become
B
O
O
B
DO
M ¼ ðp1  c1 Þq1 and PM ¼ ðw1  c1 Þq1 , respectively. Solving the model following the same steps
as in section 4, we find that the optimal T is
1Þ
T ¼ að1aþc
Consequently, we have PR ¼
4ð2þÞa .
að1aþc1 Þ2
4ð42aaÞð1aÞ
2
4

and PM ¼

X
, where X ¼
4ð42aaÞ2 ð1aÞ
ðþ  þ 2Þa þ ð2c1 2 þ 10c1  þ 4c1  22  1012Þa3
þð2c1 2 þ 5c21  þ 2 þ c21 2 þ 10c21  36c1 þ 34 þ 17
26c1 Þa2 þ ð24c21 ;40  8c21 64c1  8 þ 16c1 Þa;þ16
@PM
We
now
have
þ16c21  32c1 .
@ ¼
a2 ð1aþc1 Þð3a2 2a2 þ10ac1 þc1 a3a2aþ412c1 Þ
.
Since
the
4ð42aaÞ3 ð1aÞ

denominator is positive and the first two terms in
@P
the numerator are positive as well, @M [ 0 if
3a2aþ4
.
c1 \ 3a 2a
1210aa
2

2

h

Proposition 4 characterizes the effect of c1 ≥ 0. This
result is relatively robust with respect to the unit cost
of the manufacturer’s product, as it holds for a wide
range of values. Specifically, there exists a threshold
value of c1 below which the manufacturer is better off
when the retailer’s bargaining power k increases.
Also, this threshold value of c1 decreases in a. Indeed,
a sufficiently high unit cost of the manufacturer’s
product drives the prices of these products higher
and squeezes the profit margin of the manufacturer
(and this effect is more pronounced when the quality
of the 3P product, a, is higher) and lessens its outside
option.
6.3. Non-Zero Marginal Cost for Manufacturer
Pursuing Outside Option
Recall our assumption that the manufacturer’s alternative channel, i.e., outside option, is as efficient as
selling through the retailer. But, in practice, the

Mantin, Krishnan, and Dhar: Strategic Role of Third-Party Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 23(11), pp. 1937–1949, © 2014 Production and Operations Management Society

Figure 3

1947

The Manufacturer’s Bargaining Profit When s ≥ 0. (a) a = 0.25 (b) a = 0.75

(a)

retailer’s channel is likely to be more efficient and the
manufacturer is likely to incur a higher cost if he has
to distribute its product through its alternative channel. In this section, we assume that the manufacturer
incurs a per-unit distribution cost s when bargaining
fails and it needs to sell the product independently.
Figure 3 illustrates the effect of s.
This figure reveals that Proposition 2 continues to
hold as long as the additional per unit distribution
cost, s, is not too high. The intuition is straightforward.
Suppose the incremental cost s is very high. This
would make the manufacturer’s outside option very
unattractive. In this case, whatever the bargaining
power of the retailer, it has less need to use the 3P
marketplace as a bargaining chip. This will lead us
closer to the traditional bargaining result—as the
retailer’s bargaining power increases, the manufacturer’s profit decreases. Interestingly, we notice that in
Panel (b) of Figure 3, there is a range where the manufacturer’s profit decreases and then increases in k.
6.4. Other Extensions
The stylized model that we consider in this paper
suppresses many features that are observed in practice. In this section, we briefly discuss the implications
of considering some of these other features. Details of
these extensions are available in an Online appendix
that accompanies this paper.
One common, and perhaps surprising, feature of
dual-format retailing is that some “new” products
sold directly by the retailer are also available on the
3P marketplace. A new Nikon camera may be sold by

(b)

Amazon, and may also be available from other electronic retailers who use Amazon’s platform. In this
setting, the manufacturer has some ability to influence
the 3P marketplace through the wholesale price it
charges the 3P sellers. We model this extension
(Appendix S1), and show that a version of Proposition
2 continues to hold.
Another feature of our stylized model is the use of
the Mussa–Rosen demand framework, which is an
address or location based model. To check the sensitivity of our results to alternative demand systems,
we also analyze a (quadratic utility) linear demand
model. As we show in Online Appendix S2, our key
results are not sensitive to changes in the demand
specification.
Lastly, recall our assumption that the retailer commits to the 3P marketplace transaction fee before bargaining with the manufacturer. We justify this
assumption because, as discussed earlier, it is difficult
for the retailer to negotiate and renegotiate contracts
with multiple used product sellers. Also, this is what
is observed in practice: Amazon specifies the payment
terms for 3P marketplace sellers up front, and sticks
to these terms regardless of the outcome of the bargaining game. But what if this sequence of events
were to be altered? We show (Appendix S3) that a
powerful retailer would want to alter this sequence of
events, i.e., it would not want to commit to the marketplace transaction fee ex ante. The intuition is that a
powerful retailer has no need to use the 3P marketplace strategically, whereas a weak retailer would
prefer to make such a commitment ex ante.

1948

Mantin, Krishnan, and Dhar: Strategic Role of Third-Party Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 23(11), pp. 1937–1949, © 2014 Production and Operations Management Society

7. Conclusions
The adoption of 3P marketplaces by retailers has created channel conflicts between these retailers and
upstream manufacturers. In this paper, we show that
a 3P marketplace plays a critical strategic role in the
negotiation between a dual-format retailer and a manufacturer. Third-party marketplaces benefit retailers
and hurt manufacturers. Total channel profit (producer surplus) is reduced, while consumers benefit.
These results are consistent with evidence that many
retailers are opening 3P marketplaces, and manufacturers are trying to limit 3P sales of their products.
Interestingly, if the manufacturer cannot limit sales
by 3P sellers, then the manufacturer would prefer that
the right to offer a contract is allocated to the retailer.
This is because, as the retailer’s bargaining power
increases, it will seek to maximize total profit by limiting competition between the 3P and 1P markets. This
ends up benefiting the manufacturer.
The emergence of dual-format retailing offers several other avenues for further research. One issue is
that the presence of a variety of sellers on the 3P marketplace could give rise to price dispersion for some
products. In fact, price dispersion can be observed on
Amazon Marketplace by looking at the prices charged
by 3P sellers. Price dispersion has been studied extensively in the literature and theories (such as Baye and
Morgan 2001, Varian 1980) have been developed to
explain the existence of price dispersion (e.g., through
search frictions, switching costs, and heterogeneous
demand). Abstracting away from the phenomenon of
price dispersion on the 3P marketplace, our model
implicitly assumes that marketplace sellers set a single market clearing price.
A second issue is that some 3P sellers may not be
price takers and may be able to bargain with the
dual-format retailer for improved contract terms.
Also, a manufacturer who is unable to completely
restrict 3P sales may try to influence the 3P market
as a way to mitigate the retailer’s strategic behavior.
For example, the manufacturer could sell both
through the retailer and through 3P sellers—potentially influencing the platform price and benefiting
from platform sales. As 3P marketplaces evolve, we
expect to see manufacturers and dual-format retailers vying for control over the 3P marketplace
because the controlling firm is in a position to tilt
the bargaining outcome in its favor.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Yigal Gerchak, Daniel Granot, Eran
Hanany, Mahesh Nagarajan and Charles Weinberg, as well
as the participants of the Product and Service Innovation
conference, the INFORMS Marketing Science conference,

and seminar participants at the Richard Ivey School of Business and the Indian School of Business for their valuable
comments and suggestions.

Notes
1

Note that by “bargaining power,” we refer to the bargaining “ability” of the players and not to their market powers. As in existing models of channel bargaining, we
assume that this bargaining power is predetermined and
known to channel players before the bargaining starts. In
reality, there can be many sources of bargaining power
(e.g., negotiation skills of managers). Further interesting
discussions on some of these sources of bargaining power
are provided by Iyer and Villas-Boas (2003), Kuksov and
Pazgal (2007), and Draganska et al. (2010).
2
In many cases, manufacturers have tried to minimize
competition from the 3P sellers by insisting on minimum
advertised pricing (MAP). Under MAP, 3P sellers are not
allowed to advertise prices lower than those approved by
the manufacturer. The MAP strategy has been adopted
thus far by LG, Sony, Sharp, and Samsung among others.
As reported by Tarr (2012): “LG [is] opting [. . .] to restrict
selling by third parties through marketplace sites on large
retail portals like Amazon and Sears.com.”
3
In reality, sellers sometimes pay a per-unit fee as well as a
fixed percentage of the sale price (a revenue share). See, for
example, http://www.amazon.com/gp/help/customer/
display.html?nodeId=1161232.
4
The bargaining setup captures, at the limit of bargaining
power (k = 0 and k = 1), the often-used marketing channel
and supply chain models based on a principal-agent
framework with a take-it-or-leave-it offer. For example, in
Shaffer (1991), the downstream retailer acts as the principal (k = 1); on the other hand, Tirole (1988) in his design
of two-part tariff contract assumes the upstream manufacturer as the principal (k = 0).
5
Note that the failure of bargaining is an “off-equilibrium” outcome, i.e., bargaining will be successful in
equilibrium. The outside options, however, will affect
the equilibrium profits of both players.
6
In section 6, we illustrate the behavior of the model when
c1 > 0.
7
The proposed contract design is equivalent to quantity
forcing contracts employed, for example, by Marx and
Shaffer (2010) and O’Brien and Shaffer (2005). Alternatively, we could have assumed that the firms bargain over
the wholesale price only, as in Iyer and Villas-Boas (2003).
But the contract we analyze allows us to focus on the bargaining issues (splitting the pie) without introducing the
additional complication that arises due to the double marginalization that would accompany a standard wholesale
price only contract. Besides, one can argue that since the
manufacturer and retailer can recognize the inefficiency
introduced by a wholesale price only contract, they would,
as rational agents, choose to expand the space of bargaining parameters to achieve efficiency. Further justification
for adopting a contract with two terms is provided by
Krishnan and Winter (2007).
8
In section 6.3, we discuss the impact of relaxing this
assumption.

Mantin, Krishnan, and Dhar: Strategic Role of Third-Party Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 23(11), pp. 1937–1949, © 2014 Production and Operations Management Society
9

See
http://www.amazonservices.com/content/sell-onamazon.htm?ld=AZBASOACTO.
10
Once the 3P product is priced out of the market in the
outside option outcome (by setting T ¼ að1aÞ
2a leading to
a
qO
¼
0),
a
positive
quantity
of
of
the
3P product is
3
2ð2aÞ
still expected to be sold under the bargaining outcome.
This occurs as the manufacturer competes fiercely in the
outside option outcome as to reduce the retailer’s outside
option, whereas under the bargaining outcome, this competition is internalized by the retailer.
11
We assume that the consumers, when considering a purchase in the first period, do not account for the surplus
that may arise from reselling the product in the second
period. Regardless, consumers, as they emerge as marketplace sellers in the second period, make zero profit from
the marketplace transaction.
12
We note that when this constraint is binding, that is,
when q23 ¼ q11 , no decision is required in the second period
as both the quantity and price of the used good are
known (where the latter is determined from the retailer’s
commitment to the marketplace transaction fee) and,
hence, the corresponding price and quantity of the new
product can be calculated from Equation (7).

References
Alberge, D. 2008. Amazon uses all its might to wage price war
against publisher. The Times (London). July 19.
Baye, M. R., J. Morgan. 2001. Information gatekeepers on the internet and the competitiveness of homogeneous product markets. Am. Econ. Rev. 91: 454–474.
Barr, A. 2012. Brands Cry Foul Over Unauthorized Sellers on
Amazon. Reuters. Available at http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/10/23/us-amazon-sellers- idUSBRE89M1CT20121023
(accessed date March 27, 2013).
Carvajal, A. 2008. Small publishers feel power of Amazon’s ‘buy’
button. N. Y. Times, June 16.
Chen, Z. 2003. Dominant retailers and the countervailing-power
hypothesis. RAND J. Econ. 34(4): 612–625.
Draganska, M., D. Klapper, S. B. Villas-Boas. 2010. A larger slice
or a larger pie? An empirical investigation of bargaining
power in the distribution channel. Mark. Sci. 29(1): 57–74.
Dukes, A. J., E. Gal-Or, K. Srinivasan. 2006. Channel bargaining
with retailer asymmetry. J. Mark. Res. 43(2): 84–97.
Feng, Q., L. X. Lu. 2012. The strategic perils of low cost outsourcing. Manage. Sci. 58(6): 1196–1210.
Frishberg, M. 2000. Authors Hate Feeling Cheap, Used. Wired Magazine. Available at http://www.wired.com/print/techbiz/
media/news/2000/12/40886 (accessed date December 2000).
Ghose, A., M. D. Smith, R. Telang. 2006. Internet exchanges for
used books: An empirical analysis of product cannibalization
and welfare Impact. Inf. Syst. Res. 17(1): 3–19.
Gilbert, S. M., Y. Xia, G. Yu. 2006. Strategic outsourcing for competing OEMs that face cost reduction opportunities. IIE Trans.
38(11): 903–915.
Iyer, G., J. M. Villas-Boas. 2003. A bargaining theory of distribution channels. J. Mark. Res. 40(2): 80–100.

1949

Jiang, B., K. Jerath, K. Srinivasan. 2011. Firm strategies in the “Mid
Tail” of platform-based retailing. Mark. Sci. 30(5): 757–775.
Krishnan, H., R. A. Winter. 2007. Vertical control of price and
inventory. Am. Econ. Rev. 95(5): 1840–1857.
Kuksov, D., A. Pazgal. 2007. The effects of cost and competition
on slotting allowances. Mark. Sci. 26(2): 259–267.
Liu, Y., R. K. Tyagi. 2011. The benefits of competitive upward
channel decentralization. Manage. Sci. 57(4): 741–751.
McGuire, T. W., R. Staelin. 1983. An industry equilibrium analysis
of downstream vertical integration. Mark. Sci. 2(2) 161–191.
Marx, L. M., G. Shaffer. 2010. Slotting allowances and scarce shelf
space. J. Econ. Manage. Strat. 19 (3): 575–603.
Morton, F. S., F. Zettelmeyer. 2004. The strategic positioning of
store brands in retailer-manufacturer negotiations. Rev. Ind.
Organ. 24: 161–194.
Miller, M. J. 2012. The Other Shoe Drops: Adidas, Nike and Asics
Ban eBay and Amazon. brandchannel.com. Available at
http://www.brandchannel.com/home/post/2012/07/12/Adi
das-Nike-Asics-Ban-eBay-Amazon-071212.aspx (accessed date
March 27, 2013.
Mussa, M., S. Rosen. 1978. Monopoly and product quality. J. Econ.
Theory. 18(08): 301–317.
Muthoo, A. 1999. Bargaining Theory with Applications. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Narasimhan, C., R. T. Wilcox. 1998. Private labels and the channel
relationship: A cross category analysis. J. Bus. 71(4): 573–600.
O’Brien, D. P., G. Shaffer. 2005. Bargaining, bundling, and clout:
The portfolio effects of horizontal mergers. RAND J. Econ.
36(9): 573–595.
Rochet, J.-C., J. Tirole. 2006. Two-sided markets: A progress
report. RAND J. Econ. 37(09): 645–667.
Ryan, J. K., D. Sun, X. Zhao. 2012. Competition and coordination
in online marketplaces. Prod. Oper. Manag. 21(6): 997–1014.
Shaffer, G. 1991. Slotting allowances and resale price maintenance:
A comparison of facilitating practices. RAND J. Econ. 22: 120–
136.
Stone, B. 2009. Can Amazon be the wal-mart of the web? N. Y.
Times September 20.
Tarr, G. 2012. LG Imposes Online UPP Restrictions. TWICE, Available at http://www.twice.com/articletype/news/lg-imposesonline-upp-restrictions/103090 (accessed date April 14, 2013.
Tirole, J. 1988. The Theory of Industrial Organization, MIT Press,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Varian, H. R. 1980. A model of sales. Am. Econ. Rev. 70(4): 651–659.
Weise, K. 2013. Company News: Wal-Mart, Verizon, Time Warner, Microsoft, News Corp. Bloomberg Businessweek. Available at http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-03-07/
company-news-wal-mart-verizon-tblime-warner-microsoftnews-corp-dot (accessed date March 28, 2013).

Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the
online version of this article:
Appendix S1: 1P New—3P New—3P Used Model.
Appendix S2: Quadratic Utility.
Appendix S3: Contingent Contract.

