Vol. 21, No. 6, November–December 2012, pp. 997–1014
ISSN 1059-1478|EISSN 1937-5956|12|2106|0997

DOI 10.1111/j.1937-5956.2012.01332.x
© 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces*
Jennifer K. Ryan
Department of Industrial & Systems Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 110 8th St., CII, Suite 5015, Troy, NY 12180,
ryanj6@rpi.edu

Daewon Sun
Department of Management, Mendoza College of Business, University of Notre Dame, Room 359, Notre Dame, IN 46556, dsun@nd.edu

Xuying Zhao
Department of Management, Mendoza College of Business, University of Notre Dame, Room 361, Notre Dame, IN 46556, xzhao1@nd.edu

nline marketplaces, such as those operated by Amazon, have seen rapid growth in recent years. These marketplaces
serve as an intermediary, matching buyers with sellers, whereas control of the good is left to the seller. In some
cases, e.g., the Amazon marketplace system, the firm that owns and manages the marketplace system will also sell competing products through the marketplace system. This creates a new form of channel conflict, which is a focus of this article. We consider a setting in which a marketplace firm operates an online marketplace through which retailers can sell
their products directly to consumers. We consider a single retailer, who currently sells its product only through its own
website, but who may choose to contract with Amazon to sell its product through the marketplace system. Selling the
product through the marketplace expands the available market for the retailer, but comes at some expense, e.g., a fixed
participation fee or a revenue sharing requirement. Thus, a key question for the retailer is whether she should choose to
sell through the marketplace system, and if so, at what price. We analyze the optimal decisions for both the retailer and
the marketplace firm and characterize the system equilibrium.

O

Key words: e-Business; online marketplace; coordination; competition; game theory
History: Received: August 2010; Accepted: November 2011 by Amiya Chakravarty, after 2 revisions.

from suppliers and resells them to consumers
(Hagiu 2007). As a result, as noted in the above
quote, a retailer selling goods through the marketplace may find itself in direct competition with
Amazon. This potential conflict, and its impact on
both Amazon and the retailers who sell through
the Amazon marketplace, is the focus of this article.
For additional context, we consider the following
motivating example:

1. Introduction and Motivation
Online marketplaces, such as those operated by
Amazon, eBay, and Google, have seen rapid growth
in recent years. These marketplaces serve as a “twosided platform,” in which the intermediary, or marketplace firm, provides the service of matching buyers
with sellers, whereas control of the good is left to the
seller (Hagiu 2007). For example, while Amazon
offers several programs through which merchants
(i.e., sellers or retailers) can sell their products to consumers, their popular marketplace program, works as
follows:

Some retailers suggest that conflicts ... are inevitable on Amazon’s site. Unlike Amazon, other
Web shopping malls, such as those of Google
Inc. and Yahoo Inc., don’t peddle their own
wares in competition with the tenants.
“Before anyone gets into bed with them, they
need to think about whether they’re a successful
business, because Amazon or one of its partners
one day will compete with them,” says Pinny
Gniwisch, executive vice president of online
jeweler Ice.com.

Amazon Marketplace is for selling new, used,
refurbished and collectible items—you can list
your item right alongside the same item carried
by Amazon.com. Marketplace transactions
occur between the seller and the customer
directly.1
Of course, Amazon is also in the business of selling
products themselves, i.e., Amazon also plays the
traditional “merchant” role, in which it buys goods

Ice.com began selling jewelry through Amazon’s
site in April 2002. In 2004, Mr. Gniwisch says,
997

998

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

Ice.com executives noticed that Amazon itself
had begun selling pearl necklaces and diamond
earrings—some of Ice.com’s best-selling products. Ice.com still generates revenue from its
presence on Amazon, but Mr. Gniwisch says it’s
possible that his company will terminate its
relationship some day. (Mangalindan 2006)
In this article, we consider a setting in which a
marketplace firm, such as Amazon, operates an online
marketplace through which retailers can sell their
products directly to consumers. We consider a single
retailer, who currently sells its product only through
its own website (online store), but who may choose
to contract with Amazon to sell its product through
the marketplace system. Selling the product through the
marketplace expands the market of available consumers for the retailer, but generally comes at some
expense to the retailer, e.g., a fixed participation fee
or a revenue sharing requirement. Thus, a key question is whether the retailer should choose to sell
through the marketplace system, and if so, at what
price.
We are also interested in the problem from the
perspective of the marketplace firm, e.g., Amazon.
In this case, we are interested in the marketplace
firm’s decision regarding whether to sell a competing (i.e., identical) product, how to price that competing product, and how to design the contract
with the participating retailer. A description of the
contractual agreement between Amazon and the
retailers participating in the marketplace program
can be found on the Amazon website.2 Essentially,
the contract consists of a flat monthly fee along
with a fixed proportion of the retailer’s sales revenue, which is called the referral fee. Thus, we will
model this contract as a revenue sharing contract
with a fixed fee for participation, and we will
determine the equilibrium contract parameters for
our model setting.
Given this motivation and problem framework, our
research questions include:
 Under what conditions should the marketplace
firm sell products that compete with those
offered by its merchants? That is, should the
marketplace firm introduce competition into
the system?
 Under what conditions does the online retailer
prefer to sell products through the marketplace? How does competition from the marketplace firm affect the performance of the online
retailer?
 Is the marketplace contract efficient? Can the
existing contract be used to coordinate the
system?

We make two key assumptions in our model. The
first is that selling through the marketplace system
helps the online retailer obtain access to a larger
segment of customers. This assumption reflects the
relative prominence and name recognition of a
marketplace firm such as Amazon (see Bakos [1997]
and Bhargava and Choudhary [2004]). The second
assumption is that, all else equal, consumers prefer to
purchase products through the marketplace system,
rather than through the retailer’s own website. Specifically, we assume that while the physical product provides the same utility regardless of which channel it is
purchased through, the utility associated with the
actual purchasing process (including search, payment, shipment, and order tracking) may differ across
the channels. This assumption reflects the relative
prominence and name recognition of a marketplace
firm such as Amazon, as well as the marketplace
firm’s “ability to recommend products, create consumer trust and ... perceived neutrality” (Bakos
2001). In addition, the process of placing the order,
making payment, and tracking the order is likely to
be easier for purchases made through the marketplace system.
1.1. Contributions
We believe we are the first to analyze the impact of
competition in an online marketplace system in which
the marketplace firm may sell a product that directly
competes with the good sold by its merchant. Thus,
our model allows us to capture a specific form of
channel conflict created by an Amazon-type marketplace system. Specifically, the agreement between
Amazon and its merchants can be considered to be a
marketing alliance. As Chatterjee (2002) notes, marketing alliances are “contractual relationships undertaken by firms who perform complementary activities
in facilitating marketing exchanges. Unlike manufacturer-distributor partnerships, marketing alliances are
horizontal relationships between firms at the same
level of the value-added chain and represent a form
of ‘symbiotic marketing’ (Adler 1966, Vardarajan and
Rajaratnam 1986).”
However, the relationship between the marketplace firm and its merchant is not simply a horizontal one. As Chatterjee (2002) further notes, marketing
alliances “may not be equally beneficial to all partners and the dominant role of one branded component can affect the value of the partnering
component. The potential for serious conflict is
always present as partners may compete with each
other in other product lines and, on occasion, in
those directly covered by the alliance agreement.”
This latter situation is the one studied in our article,
with Amazon the dominant partner due to its name
recognition, as well as its role as owner of the mar-

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

ketplace system. In addition, the relationship is further complicated by the nature of the revenue sharing contract between the marketplace firm and the
merchant. We believe we are the first to study this
particular form of channel conflict. In addition,
given the rapid growth of marketplace systems, we
believe that understanding the impact of competition and channel conflict in these systems is of critical importance to the success of marketplace firms
such as Amazon, as well as their merchants.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In section 2, we review the relevant literature. In
section 3, we provide a model description and formal
problem statement. In Sections 4 and 5, we analyze a
number of potential system configurations to help us
to understand the channel choices made by each firm.
In section 6 we characterize the overall system equilibrium and present a series of numerical examples to
provide additional insights into the equilibrium
results. We conclude, in section 7, with a discussion of
the managerial insights provided by this research, as
well as directions for future work.

2. Literature Review
We next review the relevant literature, which falls
into four categories: a) single supplier, multi-retailer
models, b) dual channels of distribution, c) online
retailing, and d) coordination through revenue sharing contracts.
As we consider a product that can be distributed
through multiple, competing channels of distribution, our research has some similarities to the literature considering competition in a general single
supplier, n-retailer supply chain. For our purposes,
the most relevant papers are those in which the
retailers compete only on price, e.g., Bryant (1980),
Bernstein and Federgruen (2003, 2004, 2005), and Birge et al. (1998). However, one critical difference is
that, while our model has three potential channels of
distribution, two of those channels are controlled by
a single firm (the retailer controls sales of her product on both her own website and through the marketplace system). In addition, much of the research
on competition in single supplier, n-retailer systems,
has focused on the case of n = 2. In our case, we
have three sources of the product, each with their
own price, a fact that significantly complicates the
analysis. Finally, Choi (1996) considers a duopoly of
so-called “common retailers,” i.e., retailers who sell
multiple, competing brands. He studies a system
with two competing manufacturers providing goods
to each of the two competing retailers. This model
not only has some similarities to our own but also
has some key differences. Most importantly, Choi
(1996) assumes that the firms that provide the goods

999

are independent of the firms that sell the goods,
which is not the case in our model.
As we consider a retailer who, in addition to selling its product through her own website, is considering selling its product through a secondary channel
of distribution, i.e., the marketplace, our research has
some overlap with the literature on dual channels of
distribution and, in particular, on supply chains with
manufacturer-direct sales. A variety of authors, e.g.,
Dumrongsiri et al. (2008), Chiang et al. (2003), Wu
and Mallik (2010) and Cattani et al. (2006), have considered models in which the retail price is a decision
variable, and thus the two channels (direct and retail)
compete on price. Other research on manufacturerretailer competition in dual channel supply chains
takes price as fixed. Here, the locations may compete
on inventory (e.g., Geng and Mallik [2007] and Boyaci [2005]) or on other factors such as sales effort (e.
g., Tsay and Agrawal [2004] and Hendershott and
Zhang [2006]). Finally, Seifert et al. (2006) consider a
supply chain with multiple independent retailers and
a single “virtual” store. The main differences
between this article and the existing research are
three-fold:
 First, in our model, consumers have three purchase options, rather than two.
 Second, the retailer controls the pricing decision
on both channels of distribution for her product,
i.e., on her own website and on the marketplace
system. Using the terminology introduced in
Hagiu (2007), while most of the literature on
dual channels of distribution considers the “merchant” model, in which the intermediaries take
ownership of the seller’s goods, we consider the
“two-sided platform” model, in which control of
the goods is left to the seller, and the intermediary simply matches buyers with sellers.
 Third, the nature of the contract between the
retailer and the secondary channel is quite specific to and motivated by the practices of leading marketplace firms, such as Amazon.
There is also a vast literature that has developed
on electronic marketplaces, bridging operations
management, management information systems,
and marketing. See Greiger (2003) and Wang et al.
(2008) for reviews of this literature. We will focus
on those papers that are directly relevant to our
research. Bernstein et al. (2008) study a traditional
retailer who is considering selling its product
online. They consider two options for entering the
online market: the retailer may develop its own
website for online sales or may “align with pure etailers to reach the online market.” Wang et al.
(2004) consider a model of a consignment contract
with revenue sharing, inspired by Amazon’s

1000

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

marketplace program. Ru and Wang (2010) consider
a similar model in which a retailer sells its product
through Amazon on a consignment basis with revenue sharing. Unlike in Wang et al. (2004), they also
consider a setting in which Amazon makes the procurement decisions and owns the inventory of the
product until it is sold. In this setting, the manufacturer determines a recommended price, which Amazon may or may not use as the actual selling price.
While both papers consider settings that are motivated by the same practical example as our
research, they differ in that they do not consider the
possibility of competition, either between the retailer’s own website and the marketplace or between
similar products being sold on the marketplace.
In this article, we model the contract between
the marketplace firm and retailer as a revenue
sharing contract with fixed participation fee. Pasternack (2002) considers a revenue sharing contract in
a newsvendor setting and shows that it can be
used to achieve channel coordination. Cachon and
Lariviere (2005) show that “[r]evenue sharing generally does not coordinate competing retailers when
each retailer’s revenue depends on its quantity, its
price, and the actions of the other retailers, e.g.,
competing price-setting newsvendors with each
retailer’s demand depending on the vector of retailer prices.” Dana and Spier (2001) consider revenue
sharing in a supply chain in which a single supplier sells to multiple retailers, each of which is
modeled as a newsvendor who must choose price
and order quantity. While our model has competing retailers and demand that depends on price,
there is no quantity decision.
The most relevant segment of the coordination literature, for our purposes, considers a manufacturer
who owns a direct sales channel. Coordination in
this setting has received little attention. If the selling
prices for each channel are fixed, the price-only,
buy-back, rebate, and revenue sharing contracts cannot coordinate the supply chain (Boyaci 2005). However, a new type of contract proposed in Boyaci
(2005), the compensation-commission contract, has
been shown to coordinate the system. Chiu et al.
(2011) also demonstrate that most popular contracts
cannot coordinate when the underlying demand
depends on the retail price. They show that a contract combining wholesale price, channel rebate, and
returns can achieve channel coordination with both
additive
and
multiplicative
price-dependent
demands. Su and Mukhopadhyay (2012) study contracts between a dominant retailer and a number of
fringe retailers. They design a contract that not only
prevents the dominant retailer from conducting any
gray market activities but also coordinates the supply chain.

3. Problem Description
We consider the following problem setting. An online
retailer (which we will refer to as “the retailer”) sells
goods through its own website (referred to as channel
b) and, in some cases, has the option of selling its
goods through an online marketplace (referred to as
channel B). In addition, the firm that owns the online
marketplace system (which we will refer to as “the
marketplace firm”) may also offer the product for sale
through the marketplace system (referred to as
channel A). Each firm decides the price(s) for the
channel(s) it operates, i.e., the marketplace firm
chooses pA , whereas the retailer chooses pb and/or pB .
If the retailer chooses to sell through the marketplace,
i.e., through channel B, the marketplace firm will
receive a flat monthly fee, k, from the retailer, as well
as a portion, /, of the retailer’s revenue from channel
B. Thus, if it chooses to offer the marketplace service
to the retailer, the marketplace firm must also choose
the appropriate contract parameters.
We assume that, when selling on channel b, the
retailer incurs a cost, denoted cb , for each unit sold.
We normalize the unit costs for sales through channels B and A to zero. We do so because we assume
that the marginal cost for sales through the marketplace system (channels B and A) is lower than for
sales through the retailer’s own website (channel b).
Note that the economic benefits of marketplace systems have been studied by many researchers (Bakos
(1991a, 1991b); Benjamin and Wigand (1995); Bhargava and Choudhary (2004); Choudhury et al. (1998);
and Strader and Shaw (1997). These benefits include
reduced transaction costs and inventory costs, and
improved supply chain management. In section 7, we
will provide a discussion of how our results are likely
to change with the introduction of marginal costs for
channels A and B.
3.1. Sequence of Events and Decisions
We next specify the sequence of events and decisions
in our model. This sequence is depicted in Figure 1.
The labels in bold at the end of the branches denote
the resulting system configuration.
The first decision is always made by the marketplace firm and is the decision regarding whether or
not to offer the marketplace service to the retailer, i.e.,
whether to allow the retailer to sell through channel
B. The sequence of subsequent events depends on this
decision. Specifically:
 If the marketplace firm offers the marketplace
service, the marketplace firm must next
decide whether to sell competing goods, i.e.,
whether to offer the product through channel
A. The firm must then determine the contract

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces

1001

Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

Figure 1 Sequence of Events and Decisions

parameters, / and k, and, if the product is
offered through channel A, the selling price pA .
We assume these parameters (/, k, and pA ) are
set simultaneously. Next, the retailer must
decide whether or not to sell through the
marketplace system, and then, she must set the
selling prices on the selected channels (b and,
possibly, B).
 If the marketplace firm chooses not to offer the
marketplace service, it must instead sell the
product through channel A to earn some revenues. In this case, the marketplace firm and the
retailer simultaneously set their respective
prices (pA and pb ).
Notice that the sequence of decisions and the nature
of the game between the marketplace firm and the
retailer depend on the marketplace firm’s initial decision regarding whether or not to offer the marketplace service. Specifically, if marketplace service is
offered, the remainder of the game is Stackelberg,
with the marketplace firm serving as leader. However, when the marketplace service is not offered, the
remainder of the game is simultaneous, i.e., the marketplace firm and the retailer choose their selling
prices at the same time.
Given this setting, Figure 1 indicates that there are
several system configurations to be considered. We
will use the notation Ab to indicate the configuration
in which the marketplace system is not offered to the
retailer, and hence sales can occur only on channels A
and b. We use ABb to denote the configuration in
which the marketplace system is offered to the retailer
and the marketplace firm chooses to sell the product.
Thus, we have potential sales through all three channels. Finally, we use the notation Bb to denote the configuration in which the marketplace system is offered
to the retailer and the marketplace firm chooses not to
sell the product. Thus, we have potential sales
through just two channels. Notice that in the ABb and

Bb configurations, it is possible that, in equilibrium,
some of the available channels may see no sales. For
example, in the Bb configuration, the equilibrium
prices may result in a zero demand on channel B, or
perhaps zero demand on channel b. We will use the
notation 0b and B0 to denote those outcomes, respectively. Similarly, the notation A0b (AB0) will be used
to denote the three channel configuration with no
demand on channel B (b).
3.2. Customer Utility and Demand Model
We consider a single segment of customers with Poisson arrival rate k per unit time. As the marketplace firm
has name recognition and high visibility (e.g., Amazon.com), we assume that all customers are aware of
the marketplace channels (i.e., channels A and B).
However, not all customers will be aware of channel b.
Rather, if the retailer sells goods only through her
online store, i.e., only through channel b, then a proportion, a, of all customers will not know about the existence of channel b. If, however, the retailer decides to
sell through the marketplace, i.e., if channel B exists,
then the visibility of the retailer is increased and, as a
result, all customers become aware of channel b.
Customers are strategic, i.e., their purchase decisions are based on utility maximization. We assume
that customers have heterogeneous product valuations, v. Thus, we assume that v is uniformly distributed in the interval [0,1]. We assume that, due to its
strong reputation and high visibility, customers prefer
to purchase from the marketplace firm. As a result, all
customers incur a disutility, 1  hb , when purchasing
from channel b. Similarly, all customers incur a disutility, 1  hB , when purchasing from channel B.
Given the customers’ general preference for the marketplace channel, as discussed in Section 1, we assume
hB [ hb . Therefore, if pA , pB , and pb denote the selling
prices on channels A, B, and b, respectively, we have
the following expressions for the utility obtained from
purchasing through channel i, Ui , for i ∈ {b,B,A}:
UA ¼ v  pA ;

UB ¼ hB v  pB ;

U b ¼ hb v  pb :

4. Marketplace Firm Does Not Offer
the Marketplace Service
We are now ready to analyze the equilibrium behavior for each of the potential system configurations. We
start by assuming that the marketplace firm chooses
not to offer the marketplace service. Then, in section
5, we assume that the marketplace firm chooses to
offer the marketplace service and we consider two
cases, depending on whether or not the product is
sold through channel A. Finally, in section 6, we consider the marketplace firm’s problem of determining
the overall system equilibrium.

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces

1002

Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

We first consider the Ab system, which we refer to
as the pure competition setting, in which the marketplace firm chooses not to offer the marketplace service
to the retailer. Thus, the retailer sells the product
only through her own online channel, channel b,
whereas the marketplace firm also sells the product
through the marketplace system, i.e., channel A, to
earn some revenues. In this case, while all customers
are aware of channel A, only a fraction, (1  a), of
customers are aware of channel b. Those customers
who are not aware of channel b will never choose
channel b and will only choose channel A if v  pA .
Those customers who are aware of both channels
will compare UA vs. Ub , choosing to purchase through
the channel that provides the highest net utility. Thus,
if v  pA  hb v  pb and v  pA  0, a customer
will choose to purchase through channel A. On the
other hand, if hb v  pb  v  pA and hb v  pb  0, a
customer will choose to purchase through channel b.
Finally, if v  pA \ 0 and hB v  pB \ 0, a customer
will choose not to purchase.
Using this logic, assuming that pb  hb and pA  1,
and using the fact that v is uniformly distributed over
[0,1], we can write the demands for channels b and A,
Db and DA , as follows:
8
p
0;
if pA  hbb  pb þ 1  hb
>
>


<
pA pb
pb
pb
Db ¼ ð1  aÞk 1hb  hb ; if hb  pA  pb þ 1  hb


>
>
p
: ð1  aÞk 1  pb ;
if b  p þ 1  h  p
hb

hb

b

b

A

to maximize pA . We can now characterize the equilibrium behavior of the system.
ð1hb Þhb
4
THEOREM 1. When cb \ 2ð1þaÞh
and hb \ 2þpﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
,
b
43aþ3a
there exists a unique equilibrium for the Ab system. The
equilibrium prices and profits are as follows (the superscript refers to the system configuration, Ab, whereas the
subscript refers to the channel, A or b):

ð1  hb Þhb þ 2cb ð1  ahb Þ
4  ð1 þ 3aÞhb
ð1  aÞcb þ 2ð1  hb Þ
¼
;
4  ð1 þ 3aÞhb

pAb
b ¼
pAb
A

pAb
b ¼
pAb
A ¼

and

kð1  aÞ½hb  h2b  2cb þ cb ð1 þ aÞhb 2
hb ð1  hb Þð4  ð1 þ 3aÞhb Þ2
kð1  ahb Þ½2 þ ð1  aÞcb  2hb 2
ð1  hb Þð4  ð1 þ 3aÞhb Þ2

and

:

When these conditions are not satisfied, a unique equilibrium may not exist for the Ab system.
Theorem 1 indicates that two conditions are
required to ensure the existence of a unique equilibrium in the pure competition setting, in which sales
occur only through channels A and b. First, the cost
incurred for selling on channel b, cb , must be sufficiently small. Otherwise, the retailer will not find it
profitable to sell on channel b. Second, hb , that is, the

8
p
>
akð1  pA Þ þ ð1  aÞkð1  pA Þ;
if pA  hbb  pb þ 1  hb
>
<


pA pb
p
DA ¼ akð1  pA Þ þ ð1  aÞk 1  1h
; if hbb  pA  pb þ 1  hb
b
>
>
p
:
akð1  pA Þ;
if hbb  pb þ 1  hb  pA :

Thus, there are three possible cases to consider. For
the remainder of this section, case 1 will refer to the
p
case in which pA is small relative to pb , i.e., pA \ hbb 
pb þ 1  hb . Case 2 will refer to the case in which pA
p
is in the middle range, i.e., hbb  pA  pb þ 1  hb .
Finally, case 3 will refer to the case in which pA is
p
large relative to pb , i.e., pA  pb þ 1  hb  hbb . As
would be expected, when pA is small relative to pb ,
there is demand only on channel A. However,
because a fraction, a, of customers are aware only of
channel A, and not of channel b, even when pA is large
relative to pb , there will still be demand for channel A,
as well as channel b.
Given the demand functions, we can write the
profit function for each channel as pb ¼ ðpb  cb ÞDb
and pA ¼ pA DA . The retailer will choose pb to maximize pb , whereas the marketplace firm will choose pA

utility gained from purchasing from the retailer
through channel b, must also be sufficiently small.
These conditions are discussed in further detail in
section 6, where we characterize the overall system
equilibrium.
We are also interested in the behavior of the equilibrium demands for each firm. Given the equilibrium
prices, we can write the equilibrium demands for
channels A and b as follows:
DAb
A ¼

kð1  ahb Þ½ð1  aÞcb þ 2ð1  hb Þ
and
ð1  hb Þ½4  ð1 þ 3aÞhb 

DAb
b ¼

kð1  aÞ½2cb  cb ð1 þ aÞhb þ h2b  hb 
ð1  hb Þ½4  ð1 þ 3aÞhb 

Ab Ab
Finally, the equilibrium profits are pAb
A ¼ pA D A
Ab
Ab
Ab
and pb ¼ ðpb  cb ÞDb .

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces

1003

Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

The equilibrium profit earned by the retailer in this
case, pAb
b , will serve as a benchmark profit for the
retailer. If the marketplace firm offers the marketplace
service, the retailer will join the marketplace, that is,
add channel B, only if by doing so she can earn profit
equal to at least pAb
b .

5. Marketplace Firm Offers the
Marketplace Service
We next consider the setting in which the marketplace firm has chosen to offer the marketplace
service, that is, has offered the marketplace contract
to the retailer, with contract parameters / and k.
Note that by adjusting the contract parameters
appropriately, the marketplace firm can influence
the retailer’s choice of channels, that is, the retailer’s
decision regarding whether to offer the product
through channels B and/or b. In this setting, we are
interested in several questions: Under what conditions will the retailer choose to offer the product
through channel B? Should the marketplace firm
also sell the product, that is, should the firm offer
channel A? How should the marketplace firm
design the contract, that is, set / and k, to encourage the retailer to participate in the marketplace
and maximize his profits?
We first analyze, in section 5.1, the situation
in which the marketplace firm does not sell
through channel A, and thus there are two possible
channels, b and B. Then, in section 5.2, we consider the situation in which the marketplace firm
does sell through channel A. To characterize the
equilibrium for each setting, we must address two
issues: (i) how the marketplace firm will set / and
k and (ii) which channels the retailer will choose
to sell through and how she will set the price(s)
on those channel(s). As the setting in which the
marketplace firm offers the marketplace service is
modeled as a Stackelberg game, in each case, we
will find the equilibrium by working backwards,
that is, by first characterizing the retailer’s optimal
decisions for given / and k, and then determining
the marketplace firm’s optimal contract parameters,
i.e., the / and k that maximize the marketplace
firm’s profits.
5.1. Marketplace Firm Does Not Sell through
Channel A
In this setting, there are two channels to consider: B
and b. We start, in section 5.1.1, by analyzing the
retailer’s pricing and channel selection decisions,
given that she has chosen to accept the marketplace
contract. Then, in section 5.1.2, we consider the retailer’s decision of whether or not to accept the market-

place contract. Finally, in section 5.1.3, we study how
the marketplace firm will set / and k.
5.1.1. Retailer’s Pricing and Channel Selection
Decision. If the retailer accepts the marketplace contract, all customers become aware of her channel, that
is, all customers become aware of channel b. Thus,
when choosing which channel to purchase through,
all customers will compare Ub vs. UB , choosing the
channel that provides the highest net utility. Thus, if
hb v  pb  hB v  pB and hb v  pb  0, a customer
will choose to purchase through channel b. On the
other hand, if hB v  pB  hb v  pb and hB v  pB  0,
a customer will choose to purchase through channel
B. Finally, if hb v  pb \ 0 and hB v  pB \ 0, a customer will choose not to purchase. Using this logic,
assuming that pb  hb and pB  hB , and using the fact
that v is uniformly distributed over [0,1], we can write
the demands for channels b and B, Db and DB , as:
8
if pB \ hhBb pb
>
< 0;
pb
b
Db ¼ ðphBB p
if pb hhBb  pB  pb þ hB  hb
h  h Þk;
>
: ð1  bpb Þk;b
if pB [ pb þ hB  hb
hb
8
pB
< ð1  hB Þk;
DB ¼ ð1  pB pb Þk;
hB hb
:
0;

if pB \ hhBb pb
if pb hhBb  pB  pb þ hB  hb
if pB [ pb þ hB  hb :

Given these demand functions, we can write the
profit function for each channel as pb ¼ ðpb  cb Þ Db ,
pB ¼ ð1  /ÞpB DB  k, pA ¼ / pB DB þ k. As the
retailer owns both channel b and channel B, she will
seek to maximize the total profit from these two channels, i.e., she will choose pb and pB to maximize
pbþB ¼ pb þ pB ¼ ðpb  cb Þ Db þ ð1  /Þ pB DB  k:
In addition, the retailer must determine which channels (B and/or b) should have positive sales. The
following theorem characterizes the optimal solution
for the retailer:
THEOREM 2. If the retailer participates in the marketplace system, with contract parameters k and /, her
channel selection decision can be characterized as follows:
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1. If cb \  ðhB  hb Þ þ hB ðhB  hb Þ, then
a. If / \ 2chbb , system B0 is optimal
B  h b þ cb Þ
b. If 2chbb \ / \ 2ðh
2hB  hb þ cb , system Bb is optimal
c. If / [

2ðhB  hb þ cb Þ
2hB  hb þ cb ,

system 0b is optimal
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2. If cb [  ðhB  hb Þ þ hB ðhB  hb Þ, then
2

a. If / \ 1  ðhbhb hcBb Þ , system B0 is optimal.
2
b. If / [ 1  ðhbhb hcBb Þ , system 0b is optimal.
The optimal prices and profits under each system are as
follows.

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces

1004

Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

1. System B0: pB ¼ h2B , pbþB ¼ 14 kð1  /ÞhB  k,
and pA ¼ k þ 14 k/hB .
2. System Bb:
pb ¼
pB ¼
pbþB

to accept the contract, we assume that the marketplace firm will choose to sell through channel A to
obtain some revenues. Therefore, when evaluating

ð2  /Þð1  /Þhb ðhB  hb Þ þ cb ½2ð1  /ÞhB  ð2  /Þhb 
4ð1  /ÞhB  ð2  /Þ2 hb
2ð1  /ÞðhB  hb ÞhB  /cb hB

4ð1  /ÞhB  ð2  /Þ2 hb
 2

c  /cb hb þ ð1  /Þhb ðhB  hb Þ kð1  /ÞhB
i
¼ bh
k

hb
4ð1  /ÞhB  ð2  /Þ2 hb

pA ¼ k þ

k/hB ½ð2  /Þðhb  cb Þ  2ð1  /ÞhB ½/cb  2ð1  /ÞðhB  hb Þ
:
h
i2
4ð1  /ÞhB  ð2  /Þ2 hb

3. System 0b: pb ¼ 12 ðcb þ hb Þ, pbþB ¼
and pA ¼ k.

kðhb  cb Þ2
4hb

 k,

In the above, recall that B0 (0b) denotes a Bb system with
no sales on channel b (B).
The retailer’s channel selection depends on the
interactions between the problem parameters, /, cb ,
hB , and hb . For small values of the retailer’s unit cost,
cb , any of the three outcomes (Bb, B0, and 0b) are possible. As would be expected, when the revenue sharing requirement is minimal (/ is small), the B0 system
is preferred, as this eliminates the need to pay the unit
cost, cb . However, when the revenue sharing requirement is significant (/ is large), the 0b system is
preferred. Finally, when the revenue sharing requirement is moderate, a Bb system is preferred, implying
sales through both channels. The results for the case
of large cb are similar, except that the system with
sales through both channels will never be optimal. In
general, regardless of the value of cb , as / ? 0, it
becomes optimal for the retailer to have sales only on
channel B, whereas, when / ? 1, it becomes optimal
for the retailer to have sales only on channel b.
The above analysis considers the retailer’s decisions
under the assumption that she accepts the marketplace contract. In the next section, we consider the
question of when it is optimal for the retailer to accept
the contract terms and participate in the marketplace
program.
5.1.2. Retailer’s Marketplace Decision. For a given
contract (/,k), the retailer decides whether or not to
participate in the marketplace system by comparing
the optimal profit. When the marketplace firm offers
the marketplace service, he acts as the Stackelberg
leader, i.e., he offers the contract with parameters /
and k to the retailer, who must then decide whether
or not to accept the contract. If the retailer decides not

the offered contract, the retailer will compare the
equilibrium profit obtained from the Ab system,
denoted pAb
b , with the equilibrium profit obtained
under the marketplace contract. The following theorem characterizes the retailer’s optimal decision.
THEOREM 3. The retailer will choose to participate in the
marketplace system if and only if the parameters of the
marketplace contract satisfy one of the following five sets
of conditions:
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1. If cb \  ðhB  hb Þ þ hB ðhB  hb Þ, and:
a. If / \
b. If

2cb
hb

k\

2cb
hb

and k \ 14 kð1  /ÞhB  pAb
b ,

2ðhB  hb þ cb Þ
2hB  hb þ cb and
½c2b  /cb hb þ ð1  /Þhb ðhB  hb Þ kð1  /ÞhB

hb
½4ð1  /ÞhB  ð2  /Þ2 hb 

\/\

2

and k \ kðhb4hbcb Þ  pAb
b .
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2. If cb [  ðhB  hb Þ þ hB ðhB  hb Þ, and
c. If / [

2ðhB  hb þ cb Þ
2hB  hb þ cb

 pAb
b ,

ðhb  cb Þ2
and k \ 14 kð1  /ÞhB
hb hB
2
2
 ðhbhb hcBb Þ and k \ kðhb4hbcb Þ 

a. If / \ 1 

 pAb
b .

b. If / [ 1

pAb
b .

These conditions are derived from simple profit
comparisons, ensuring that the retailer’s profit, if she
accepts the marketplace contract, is at least equal to
pAb
b . One interesting observation from this theorem is
that, for certain contract parameters, it would be optimal for the retailer to accept the marketplace contract,
but then price such that there are no actual sales
through her marketplace channel, i.e., through channel B. In other words, the retailer would offer the
product through the marketplace system, but set the
marketplace price, pB , to ensure that DB ¼ 0. The benefit of this approach, for the retailer, is that by participating in the marketplace system, the retailer will
expand the set of customers who are aware of her

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

online channel, i.e., who are aware of channel b. Thus,
the retailer’s total potential market increases from
(1  a)k, when she sells only through her own channel, to k when she also participates in the marketplace. In summary, conditions 1c and 2b in Theorem 3
characterize the settings in which it would be optimal
for the retailer to pay the fixed fee, k, to participate in
the marketplace system, with the goal of expanding
the market for her own channel, with no intention of
actually selling the product through the marketplace
system. As would be expected, this type of behavior
is optimal when the level of revenue sharing required
for sales in the marketplace system, /, is sufficiently
large, whereas the fixed fee, k, is sufficiently small.
5.1.3. Marketplace Firm’s Choice of (/,k). Finally,
we consider how the marketplace firm, as the Stackelberg leader, would set the contract parameters, / and
k. Notice that, as he does not sell through channel A,
the marketplace firm receives zero profit if the retailer
chooses not to participate in the marketplace. Thus,
the marketplace firm would like to design a contract
that will motivate the retailer to join the marketplace.
The following theorem presents the marketplace
firm’s optimal contract parameters:
THEOREM 4. If the marketplace firm offers the marketplace service to the retailer, but does not sell the goods
himself, the marketplace firm’s optimal contract parameters are
khB
/Bb ¼ 0 and kBb ¼
 pAb
b :
4
The total profit earned by the marketplace firm is
Bb
pBb
¼
A ¼k

khB
 pAb
b :
4

Under the (kBb ; /Bb ) contract, the retailer will choose to
participate in the marketplace and will follow the optimal
solution for the B0 system, as given in Theorem 2.
In addition, the (kBb ; /Bb ) contract maximizes the total
system profit, pA þ pbþB . In other words, the contract
coordinates the system in which the marketplace firm does
not sell through channel A.
Using the results of Theorem 2, it is easy to verify
hB
Bb
Bb
k
that if / = 0, then pBb
B ¼ 2 , Db ¼ 0, and DB ¼ 2.
Thus, the optimal profit for the retailer is
Bb
pBb
þ kh4B ¼ pAb
bþB ¼ k
b . While the conditions presented in Theorems 2 and 3 are complex functions of
the problem parameters, cb , hB , and hb , the overall
equilibrium for this system, as specified in Theorem
4, is quite simple and does not depend on the retailer’s unit cost, cb , other than through the benchmark
profit, pAb
b .
Notice that the marketplace firm’s optimal strategy
is to set the contract parameters in such a way as to

1005

guarantee retailer’s participation in the marketplace,
while ensuring that all sales take place through the
marketplace system. Also, notice that the marketplace
contract achieves channel coordination and, due to its
role as Stackelberg leader, the marketplace firm is able
to extract all of the retailer’s profits in excess of what
she would earn in the Ab system.
5.2. Marketplace Firm Sells through Channel A
In this setting, the marketplace firm sells the product
through channel A. Thus, there are three channels to
consider: A, B, and b. We analyze this three channel
system, under the assumption that the marketplace
firm offers channel A and wants the retailer to accept
the marketplace contract. In section 6, we consider the
overall equilibrium, i.e., we determine conditions
under which it is optimal for the marketplace firm to
offer channel A and to offer the marketplace contract
to the retailer.
As we saw in section 5.1, by adjusting the contract parameters, the marketplace firm can manipulate the retailer to sell through any combination of
channels B and b. That is, when there are three
potential channels, the system can end up in one of
three possible outcomes: AB0, A0b, or ABb, where
AB0 (A0b) denotes a three channel system with sales
only through channels A and B (A and b), whereas
ABb denotes a three channel system with sales
through all three channels. As the Stackelberg game
leader, the marketplace firm is able to select the system that generates the most profit for him. In the
following sections, we will analyze each of the three
possible outcomes individually. In Section 6, we will
use these results, along with those from Sections 4
and 5.1, to determine the overall equilibrium, i.e., to
determine which system provides the marketplace
firm with the highest overall profit.
5.2.1 AB0 System: Sales through Channels A
and B Only. We first consider the system in which
the retailer chooses to sell the product through the
marketplace system, but not through her own online
channel. Thus, as the marketplace firm also sells the
product, there are two channels to consider, channel
A and channel B. In this system, as the retailer sells
through the marketplace system, all customers are
aware of both channels. Therefore, when choosing
which channel to purchase through, all customers
will compare UA vs. UB , choosing the channel that
provides the highest net utility. Thus, if v  pA 
hB v  pB and v  pA  0, a customer will choose to
purchase through channel A. On the other hand, if
hB v  pB  v  pA and hB v  pB  0, a customer
will choose to purchase through channel B. Finally, if
v  pA \ 0 and hB v  pB \ 0, a customer will choose
not to purchase.

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces

1006

Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

Using this logic, assuming that pB  hB , and using
the fact that v is uniformly distributed over [0,1], we
can write the demand functions for channels A and B,
p p
DA , and DB , as DA ¼ kð1  1A hBB Þ and DB ¼
pA  pB
pB
kð 1  hB  hB Þ, where strictly positive demand on each
p
channel requires that the prices satisfy hBB  pA 
pB þ 1  hB . When any one of these conditions is not
satisfied, the AB0 system will transfer to one of the
other systems considered in this article. Finally, given
the demand functions, we can write the profit function for each channel as pB ¼ ð1  /Þ pB DB  k and
pA ¼ pA DA þ / pB DB þ k.
We are now ready to characterize the equilibrium
prices and contract parameters for the AB0 system.
Recall that the marketplace firm serves as the Stackelberg leader, choosing the contract parameters to optimize his own profits. Also, recall that the retailer will
agree to participate in the marketplace system only if
her profit under the marketplace contract is at least
equal to pAb
b . We summarize the AB0 system equilibrium in the following theorem.
THEOREM 5. To ensure that the retailer chooses the AB0
system, while maximizing his own profits, the marketplace firm should set the contract parameters as follows:
/AB0 ¼ 0

and

kAB0 ¼

kð1  hB ÞhB
ð4  3hB Þ2

 pAb
b ;

where pAb
b is the retailer’s equilibrium profit in the benchmark Ab system. The resulting equilibrium prices and
profits are
pAB0
¼
A
pAB0
A

2ð 1  hB Þ
4  3hB

and

kð 1  hB Þ
¼
 pAb
b
4  3hB

pAB0
¼
b

hB ð 1  hB Þ
;
4  3hB

and pAB0
¼ pAb
B
b :

The theorem says that to ensure that the retailer
chooses the AB0 system, the marketplace firm should
set / = 0, i.e., the marketplace contract should have
no revenue sharing. This, coupled with the fact that
the unit cost of selling through channel b is cb [ 0,
implies that the retailer has no incentive to offer the
product through channel b. In addition, the theorem
indicates that the marketplace firm is able to extract
all profits in excess of the benchmark profit (pAb
b ) from
the retailer.
5.2.2. A0b System: Sales through Channels A
and b Only. We next consider the system in which
the retailer chooses to participate in the marketplace
system, but with sales occurring only through her
own online channel. Thus, there are two channels
with positive sales, A and b. Recall that by participat-

ing in the marketplace system the retailer is able to
increase her potential market from (1  a)k to k.
Thus, there may be instances in which the retailer
would find it beneficial to pay the fixed cost, k, to participate in the marketplace system, even if she will not
have any actual sales through channel B.
When making their purchasing choice, all customers
will compare the net utilities offered by channels A
and b. Using the same logic as applied in the previous
sections, assuming that pb  hb , and using the fact that
v is uniformly distributed over [0,1], we can write the
demand functions for channels A and b, DA and Db , as
DA ¼ kð1  p1Ahpbb Þ and Db ¼ kðp1Ahpbb  phbb Þ, where
strictly positive demand on channels A and b requires
that the prices satisfy the following conditions:


pb
pB  pb
pA  pb
\pA  pB þ
 1:
ð1  hB Þ and
hb
hB  hb
1  hb
ð1Þ
When any one of the above conditions is not satisfied, the A0b system will transfer to one of the other
systems considered in this article. Finally, given
these demand functions, we can write the profit
function for each channel as pb ¼ ðpb  cb Þ Db  k
and pA ¼ pA DA þ k.
We are now ready to characterize the equilibrium
prices and contract parameters for the A0b system.
We do so in the following theorem.
 hb Þ
THEOREM 6. If cb \ 2h4b ð1
 3hb , to ensure that the retailer
chooses the A0b system, while maximizing his own profits, the marketplace firm should set the contract parameters as follows:

/A0b ¼ 1 "and
k

A0b

#
cb
hb ð1  hb Þ

¼k
 pAb
b ;
4hb ð1  hb Þ ð4  3hb Þ2

where pAb
b is the retailer’s equilibrium profit in the benchmark Ab system. The resulting equilibrium prices and
profits are
2ð1  hb Þ
cb hb ð1  hb Þ
and pA0b
¼ þ
;
b
4  3hb
4  3hb
2
"
#
c2b ð4  3hb Þ þ 4ð1  hb Þ2 hb
¼k
and
 pAb
b
4hb ð1  hb Þð4  3hb Þ

pA0b
A ¼
pA0b
A

pA0b
¼ pAb
B
b :
 hb Þ
is required to ensure
The condition cb \ 2h4b ð1
 3hb
that the conditions stated in Eq. (1), which imply positive demand on channels A and b, hold. The theorem
says that, to ensure that the retailer chooses the A0b
system, the marketplace firm should set / = 1, i.e.,

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

the marketplace contract should require 100% revenue sharing. This, of course, implies that the retailer
has no incentive to offer the product through channel
B. This result is in contrast with the results presented
in Theorems 4 and 5, in which the optimal / is set to
zero. Note that in the systems considered in those theorems (the Bb and AB0 systems), the marketplace firm
was trying to encourage sales through channel B.
Thus, setting / = 0 for these cases makes intuitive
sense. Finally, the theorem indicates that the marketplace firm is able to extract all profits in excess of the
benchmark profit (pAb
b ) from the retailer.
5.2.3. ABb System: Sales through Channels A, B
and b. Finally, we consider the system in which the
retailer chooses to sell the product through the marketplace system, as well as through her own online
channel. Thus, there are three channels to consider:
channel A, channel B, and channel b. In this system, as
the retailer sells through the marketplace system, all
customers are aware of three channels. Therefore,
when choosing which channel to purchase through,
all customers will compare UA vs. UB vs. Ub , choosing
the channel that provides the highest net utility. Using
the same logic as applied to the previous cases, assuming that pB  hB , pb  hb , and phBB  phbb , where the last
condition is required to ensure that there is potential
for Db [ 0, and using the fact that v is uniformly distributed over [0,1], we can write the demands for
channels A, B and b, DA , DB , and Db , as follows:




pA  pB
pA  pB pB  pb
DA ¼ k 1 

; DB ¼ k
;
1
1  hB
hB  hb
 hB

pB  pb pb

and Db ¼ k
hB  hb hb
To ensure positive demand on all three channels,
we require the prices to satisfy the following condip p
p p
tions: pA [ pB þ ðhBB  hbb Þð1  hB Þ and 1A hBB  1.
We can now write the profit functions for each
channel as pA ¼ pA DA þ /pB DB þ k, pB ¼ ð1  /Þ
pB DB  k, and pb ¼ ðpb  cÞ Db . As the retailer owns
both channel b and channel B, she will choose pb and
pB to maximize pbþB ¼ pb þ pB ¼ ðpb  cÞ Db þ
ð1  /Þ pB DB  k, whereas the marketplace firm will
choose pA , /, and k to maximize pA .
We are now ready to state our main result for this
three channel case:
THEOREM 7. No equilibrium with strictly positive
demand on all three channels exists for the ABb system.
We prove Theorem 7 by demonstrating that, in the
ABb system, the marketplace firm will choose to set
the revenue sharing parameter, /, so that there are no
sales on channel B. The intuition behind this result is

1007

that, when there are positive demands on channels b
and B, to maximize his profits, the marketplace firm
will take a large portion of the revenue earned on
channel B, i.e., / will be large. In contrast, when / is
large, the retailer will find it optimal to forgo the
potential revenue from channel B, and will instead set
pB very high, so that no sales occur on channel B. In
this way, the retailer shifts demand from channel B to
channel b, where the retailer is able to keep all of the
revenue.

6. Analysis of Overall System
Equilibrium
Our goal is to characterize the overall system equilibrium, i.e., to determine whether the marketplace firm
will offer the marketplace contract to the retailer, to
determine whether the marketplace firm will choose
to sell the product through channel A and at what
price, and to characterize the retailer’s channel selection and pricing decisions. Before doing so, we summarize the analysis completed so far.
 We considered the case in which the marketplace firm chooses not to offer the marketplace
service. We analyzed this Ab system to determine the equilibrium prices and profits.
 We then considered the case in which the marketplace firm chooses to offer the marketplace
service. There were two subcases to consider:
○ The case in which the marketplace firm does
not offer the product through channel A and
thus only channels B and b exist. For this system, we demonstrated that the marketplace
firm, as Stackelberg leader, will set the contract parameters such that the overall equilibrium has sales only through channel B. Thus,
the resulting equilibrium is the B0 system.
○ The case in which the marketplace firm offers
the product through channel A, and thus, all
three channels (A, B, and b) exist. For this
system, a retailer who participates in the
marketplace system has three options:
○ Sales through B only, the AB0 system
○ Sales through b only, the A0b system
○ Sales though both B and b, the ABb system
We analyzed the marketplace firm’s optimal contract
design for each of these three cases, and demonstrated
that no equilibrium exists for the ABb system.
Thus, to determine the overall system equilibrium,
we must compare four systems: Ab, B0, AB0, and A0b.
In section 6.1, we present our results regarding this
comparison and mathematically characterize the conditions under which each of these systems will be the

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces

1008

Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

overall equilibrium. Then, in Section 6.2, we provide
some intuition behind these results and present some
numerical results.
6.1. Characterizing the Overall System
Equilibrium
As the marketplace firm is the Stackelberg leader, it is
able to select his preferred system from among these
four potential equilibrium systems (Ab, B0, AB0, and
A0b) by adjusting the parameter values of the contract. Thus, by comparing the four systems, we just
need to consider the marketplace firm’s profits and
find the system that provides the highest profits. The
results for the four systems are summarized in Table
1. Notice that, for ease of comparison, we have rewritten the expression for pAb
A , as given in Theorem 1, so
that we can compare the profit functions by considering only the first term of each, ignoring the pAb
b term.
Clearly, the relationship between the profits for the
four systems depends on the specific parameter valTable 1.

THEOREM 8. There exist a series of thresholds whose precise definitions are provided in the proof of this theorem,
such that the overall equilibrium can be determined as
followed:
 If all four system equilibria exist according to the
conditions specified in Table 1, then use the logic
shown in Figure 2.
 If only the AB0, B0, and A0b system equilibria
exist according to the conditions specified in Table
1, then use the logic shown in Figure 5 in the
Online Appendix.
 If only the AB0, B0, and Ab system equilibria exist
according to the conditions specified in Table 1,
then use the logic shown in Figure 6 in the Online
Appendix.

Potential Equilibrium Systems

System

Conditions Required for
Existence of an Equilibrium

B0

None

Ab

ues. However, it is possible to draw some conclusions
regarding which system will be the overall equilibrium under a range of possible parameter values, as
shown in the following theorem.

ð1  hb Þhb
2  ð1 þ aÞhb
4
hb \
pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2 þ 4  3a þ 3a
None

A0b

cb \

hB
 pAb
b
4
h
i
 ½2 þ ð1  aÞc  2h 2 h ð1  ah Þ þ ð1  aÞ h  h2  c ð2  ð1 þ aÞh Þ 2 
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
k
 pAb
b
hb ð1  hb Þ½4  ð1 þ 3aÞhb 2
k

cb \

AB0

Marketplace Firm’s Profit at Equilibrium

2hb ð1  hb Þ
4  3hb



1  hB
 pAb
k
b
4  3hB
"
#
c 2 ð4  3hb Þ þ 4ð1  hb Þ2 hb
 pAb
k b
b
4hb ð1  hb Þð4  3hb Þ

Figure 2 Overall System Equilibrium: All Systems (AB0, B0, A0b, and Ab) Exist

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

 If only the AB0 and B0 system equilibria exist
according to the conditions specified in Table 1,
then AB0 is the overall equilibrium if hB \ 23.
Otherwise, B0 is the overall equilibrium.
The tree shown in Figure 2 can be used to determine which of the systems is the overall equilibrium
for any given set of parameter values. In the tree, we
use the > symbol to denote when one system dominates the other, in terms of the total system profit.
6.2. Discussion and Numerical Results
We will focus our discussion of these results on the
tree shown in Figure 2, which applies in settings in
which an equilibrium exists for all four potential systems (B0, AB0, A0b and Ab). In this tree, we start by
comparing the three systems in which the retailer
agrees to the marketplace contract, i.e., B0, AB0, and
A0b, to determine which is preferred by the marketplace firm. Once we have determined the best of these
three systems, that best system is then compared with
the “pure competition” system, i.e., Ab, in which the
marketplace firm does not offer the marketplace
contract, and thus enters into a purely competitive
relationship with the retailer.
We start by discussing the first node in the tree, in
which the marketplace firm chooses among B0, AB0,
and A0b. We first note that AB0 is never selected by
the marketplace firm in this setting. As shown in the
proof of the theorem, this is due to the fact that the
marketplace firm always prefers A0b to AB0. In other
words, given that the retailer agrees to the marketplace contract and that the marketplace firm chooses
to sell through channel A, the marketplace firm prefers to compete against channel b, than against channel B. This is because channel b can be considered to
be a weaker competitor than channel B due to its
higher unit cost (cb [ 0) and lower overall utility
(hb \ hB ). Next, we consider the retailer’s preference
for B0 vs. A0b. Three conditions must hold for the B0
system to be preferred over the A0b system: hB and hb
must be sufficiently large (hB [ 23 and hb [ ~hb ),
whereas cb must be sufficiently small (cb \ ^cb ). Having
a large hb and a small cb implies that channel b is a
strong competitor, and thus the A0b system may not
be highly profitable for the marketplace firm. In addition, when hB is large, selling through channel B is
attractive for the marketplace firm, as that firm
extracts all of the retailer’s excess profits (beyond
those earned in the Ab system). Finally, as would be
expected, if hB is sufficiently small (hB \ 23), regardless
of the other parameter values, the A0b system will be
preferred to the B0 system.
We next consider the remaining two nodes in the
tree, in which we compare the best system from the
first node (B0 or A0b) with the pure competition sys-

1009

tem, Ab. In the top part of the tree, we compare A0b
and Ab. The marketplace firm’s choice between these
systems depends on the value of a, the fraction of customers who are not aware of channel b when the
retailer does not sell through the marketplace system.
When a is small, i.e., a \ ~a, the A0b system is preferred. On the other hand, when a is large, i.e., a [ ~
a,
the Ab system is preferred. The intuition behind this
result is provided in the discussion of Figures 3 and 4
below. In the bottom part of the tree, we compare B0
and Ab. We see that B0 is preferred only when the
utility obtained by purchasing through channel B, hB ,
is sufficiently large (hB [ ^hB ), and the unit cost associated with channel b is sufficiently small (cb \ cb ).

Figure 3 Overall System Equilibrium as a Function of a and cb

(a)

(b)

1010

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

Figure 4 Overall System Equilibrium as a Function of hb and cb

(a)

the marketplace firm faces a choice between the A0b
and Ab systems.
(1) In the A0b system, all customers are aware of
channel b, whereas in the Ab system, a fraction (a) of customers are not aware of channel
b. Thus, the A0b system provides the retailer
with a larger market share and creates a
higher level of competition for the marketplace firm.
(2) In the A0b system, the marketplace firm uses
the marketplace contract to extract all excess
profits (beyond those earned in the Ab system) from the retailer.

(b)

Figures 3 and 4 are contour graphs, i.e., they were
created by comparing the profits for each system.
Each region’s label represents the system preferred by
the marketplace firm and the lines represent the
thresholds shown in Figure 2. In Figures 3a and 4a,
we have hB [ 2=3, and thus the figure shows how the
marketplace firm chooses between the A0b, Ab, and
B0 systems. Figure 3a demonstrates that when the
unit cost for sales on channel b (cb ) and the fraction of
customers who are not aware of channel b (a) are sufficiently small, channel b is seen as a strong competitor, and thus, the B0 system is preferred over both the
A0b and Ab systems. In the remainder of the graph,

Intuitively, (1) makes the A0b system less attractive
to the marketplace firm, whereas (2) makes the A0b
system more attractive to the marketplace firm. When
a is small, the effect of (1) is minimal, and thus (2)
dominates, making the A0b system attractive to the
marketplace firm. If a is large, but cb is also sufficiently large, then channel b is a weak competitor
(observe that a high unit cost on channel b will imply
a high unit price on channel b). Thus, the effect of (1)
is again minimal, i.e., even a substantial increase in
the retailer’s market share will not hurt the marketplace firm very much, allowing (2) to dominate, and
making the A0b system attractive to the marketplace
firm.
Figure 4a can be interpreted in a similar manner.
When channel b is seen as a strong competitor (sufficiently small unit cost, cb , and large utility, hb ), the B0
system is preferred over both the A0b and Ab systems.
On the other hand, when the utility associated with
channel b (hb ), is sufficiently low, the marketplace firm
would prefer to compete with channel b, rather than
channel B. Thus, the choice is between the A0b and
the Ab systems. Using the same logic as applied to
Figure 3a, we find that the A0b system is preferred
only when the unit cost for channel b is sufficiently
high, allowing the effect of (2) to dominate over the
effect of (1).
Figures 3b and 4b can be understood by noting
that hB \ 2=3, and thus the B0 system is never the
overall equilibrium. Recall that in the B0 system, the
marketplace firm extracts all of the retailer’s excess
profits. When the utility associated with purchasing
on channel B is sufficiently low (hB \ 2=3), these
excess profits will not be sufficient for the marketplace firm to justify not selling through channel A.
Thus, Figures 3b and 4b show the marketplace firm’s
choice between A0b and Ab. This choice can again be
explained by considering the trade-off between (1)
and (2). When a is sufficiently small or cb is sufficiently large, the effect of (2) will dominate the effect
of (1), and the marketplace firm will choose the A0b
system.

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

In summary, there are three possible equilibria, representing different degrees of coordination and competition between the marketplace firm and the
retailer, as outlined below:
 Pure Coordination (System B0): Sales in this system only take place through channel B, with the
retailer and the marketplace firm sharing the
overall profits. This system will be the equilibrium when the retailer is a sufficiently strong
competitor, i.e., when the utilities associated
with channels B and b are sufficiently high and
the unit cost for channel b is sufficiently low.
 Pure Competition (System Ab): The marketplace
firm does not offer the marketplace contract,
and thus, enters into a purely competitive relationship with the retailer’s online channel. This
case will be the equilibrium when the retailer is
viewed as a weak competitor to the marketplace
firm, i.e., if the utility associated with either of
the retailer’s channels (B and/or b) is sufficiently
low or if the fraction of customers who do not
know about the retailer’s online channel is large.
 Competition and Coordination (System A0b): In
this system, the marketplace firm and the retailer simultaneously coordinate (the retailer agrees
to the marketplace contract) and compete (the
retailer sells through her own channel). This
case is preferred to pure competition only when
allowing the retailer to be visible to all customers poses a minimal threat to the marketplace
firm’s own sales through the marketplace system. This case is preferred to pure coordination
except in settings in which the retailer’s channels (B and b) are viewed favorably by customers (have a low disutility) and the retailer’s unit
cost for sales on her own channel is small.
Finally, while we will not discuss the trees shown in
Figures 5 and 6 the Online Appendix, which apply in
settings in which one or more of the systems does not
have a feasible equilibrium solution, we note that the
results can be explained using the same logic used to
explain the tree in Figure 2. However, there is one
additional result worth noting. As noted in the final
bullet of Theorem 8, when neither the A0b nor the Ab
systems have a feasible equilibrium, it is possible that
the AB0 system will be the overall equilibrium. However, this will only occur when hB is sufficiently small,
i.e., when hB \ 23, the AB0 system will be preferred
over the B0 system.

7. Managerial Insights and
Conclusions
In this article, we consider a setting in which a marketplace firm, such as Amazon, operates an online

1011

marketplace through which retailers can sell their
products directly to consumers. We consider the
question of under what conditions an online retailer
would choose to contract with the marketplace firm to
sell its product through the marketplace system. Selling the product through the marketplace expands the
market of available customers for the retailer, but
also comes at a cost, i.e., a fixed participation fee plus
revenue sharing. We also consider the problem
from the perspective of the marketplace firm, studying how the firm would decide whether or not to
offer the marketplace contract to the retailer, how the
firm would set the marketplace contract parameters,
and whether the marketplace firm would choose to
sell a competing product through the marketplace
system.
This research was inspired by the experience of
companies such as Ice.com, who are initially motivated to join the marketplace system to access a larger
segment of customers, but who later find that they
must compete directly with the marketplace firm, and
thus must confront the question of whether to continue selling through the marketplace system. The
results of our research indicate that the situation Ice.
com found itself in during 2004, with sales of its
goods occurring through both its own online store
and through the Amazon marketplace, the latter in
direct competition with similar products being sold
by Amazon, may not be a stable one. In other words,
we find that the three channel system will not exist in
equilibrium. Instead, the equilibrium will be one of
four types, all of which have sales through only two
channels. We summarize each of these possibilities
below:
 In the pure coordination equilibrium, the retailer agrees to participate in the marketplace contract, while the marketplace firm chooses not to
sell the product itself. The retailer sets the
prices in such a way that there is no demand
through her own online channel, i.e., sales
occur only through her marketplace channel.
The marketplace firm sets the contract parameters, i.e., the fixed payment and degree of revenue sharing to coordinate the system, i.e., to
maximize total profit for the system, while
extracting as much profit from the retailer as
possible, making the retailer indifferent
between participating in the marketplace system and not participating.
 In the pure competition equilibrium, on the
other hand, the retailer does not participate in
the marketplace system. Instead, the retailer’s
online store and the marketplace firm coexist
and compete for a portion of the market, each
setting their own prices to maximize their own

1012

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

profits. In this system, as there is no contract
between the retailer and the marketplace firm,
the total system profit is unlikely to be maximized, i.e., the system is not coordinated.
 In the competition and coordination equilibria,
the marketplace firm and the retailer simultaneously coordinate (the retailer agrees to the
marketplace contract) and compete (the retailer
sells through either her own channel or
through the marketplace system, but not both).
We have also characterized the conditions under
which each of these systems is likely to be the equilibrium. First recall that, as the Stackelberg leader, it
is the marketplace firm who, in the end, determines
which equilibrium will result, i.e., the overall system
equilibrium will be whichever system provides the
marketplace firm with the highest profits. We find
that the pure competition equilibrium becomes more
likely when the retailer is seen as a weak competitor
to the marketplace firm (i.e., the retailer has low
name recognition or low utility). In other words, if
the marketplace system is viewed as being more
secure or as providing a greater level of service than
the retailer, and thus consumers have a clear preference for engaging in transactions with the marketplace firm rather than with the retailer, then the
competitive equilibrium is more likely. On the other
hand, we find that the pure coordination equilibrium becomes more likely when consumers do not
have a strong preference for purchasing from the
marketplace system relative to purchasing from the
retailer, i.e., when the utilities gained from purchasing through either of the retailer’s channels are
large, and when the retailer’s unit cost is low. In
particular, as the utility associated with purchasing
through the retailer’s online store increases, getting
closer to the utility obtained from purchasing
through the marketplace firm, the two channels
become more competitive, and the profits earned by
the marketplace firm in the competitive equilibrium
decrease, making the coordinated equilibrium more
attractive.
Finally, this article contributes to the existing literature by studying a specific form of channel conflict
created by an Amazon-type marketplace system. Specifically, we study the impact of competition in an
online marketplace system in which the marketplace
firm both designs the marketplace contract with the
retailer and, potentially, sells a product that directly
competes with the good sold by the retailer. In such a
system, the relationship between the marketplace firm
and the retailer is both horizontal and vertical. In
addition, the marketplace firm is the dominant partner in the system due to its name recognition, as well
as its role as owner of the marketplace system. We

believe we are the first to study this particular form of
channel conflict and to understand the potential equilibrium outcomes for such a system. Given the rapid
growth of such marketplace systems, understanding
the impact of competition and channel conflict in
these systems is of critical importance to the success
of marketplace firms such as Amazon, as well as the
retailers who take part in these systems.
7.1. Limitations and Future Research
We conclude this article with a discussion of several
limitations of our current model. First, as noted
above, we assume that both marketplace channels (B
and A) have the same unit cost, and we normalize
these costs to zero, leaving only the unit cost, cb , for
channel b. In reality, it may be the case that the marginal costs on channels A and B will be different, i.e.,
we might expect that cA \ cB \ cb . Unfortunately,
incorporating additional unit costs into the model
makes the analysis extraordinarily complex. However, we can use the results from the current analysis
to draw some conclusions regarding the impact of
marginal costs for the marketplace channels on the
equilibrium results. For example, if we had a positive
marginal cost on channel B, i.e., cB [ 0, a higher unit
cost would make channel B less competitive, thus
making it more likely that the marketplace firm
would be willing to compete directly with channel B,
i.e., making it more likely that the marketplace firm
would select the AB0 system as the overall equilibrium. Having a higher value of cB would also make it
less likely that the overall equilibrium will have sales
only through channel B, i.e., the B0 system, as having
a higher cB makes channel B less profitable, implying
that the marketplace firm would earn less through
revenue sharing in the B0 system. Future research will
seek to formalize this intuition.
Next, we note several other limitations of our
model setting. First, while we have assumed a certain
sequence of decisions in our problem setting, other
sequences are possible. Specifically, we have assumed
that the marketplace firm, as the Stackelberg leader,
acts first and sets the contract parameters, / and k, as
well as his selling price, pA . The retailer then simply
reacts to these decisions by the marketplace firm and
sets her price(s). However, it is very possible that the
marketplace firm would seek to set its price after the
retailer sets her price(s). In this case, the sequence of
decisions would be a bit more complex, with the marketplace firm first setting / and k, the retailer then
setting her price(s), and finally the marketplace firm
setting its price. Investigating this alternative decision
sequence, to understand how it affects the equilibrium results, would be an interesting topic for future
research. Second, we have not captured the dynamic
nature of the relationship between the retailer and the

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

marketplace firm. This would be an important extension to consider, particularly in settings in which participation in the marketplace system is likely to affect
consumers’ views of the retailer, i.e., as time goes by,
one would expect that more and more consumers will
become familiar with (and possibly more trusting of)
the retailer, implying that a may decrease over time,
whereas the utility associated with purchases
through the retailer may increase. Such changes may
lead the marketplace firm to adjust the contractual
relationship with the retailer over time. Third, we
could also extend the model to consider several retailers participating in a single marketplace system. In
this case, a retailer’s decision regarding whether or
not to sell their product on the marketplace will be
affected by the level of competition in the marketplace (i.e., the number of retailers), as well as the
degree of similarity between the products (i.e., the
relative values of the hi across the retailers). Also, in
such a setting, the competition between the retailers
would need to be modeled using a Nash game.
Finally, a related extension would be to consider the
role of product complementarity, i.e., the fact that the
market size for the marketplace firm is dependent on
the variety of products offered on the marketplace
system, with more variety associated with a larger
market. In such a setting, the marketplace firm may
choose to offer more attractive contractual terms to
those retailers who offer products that are not currently being sold on the marketplace system.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank the departmental editor (Professor
Amiya K. Chakravarty), senior editor, and two referees for
their contribution in improving the clarity and quality of
this paper.

Notes
*Author names are listed alphabetically and all authors
contributed equally.
1
http://advantage.amazon.com/gp/vendor/public/faq#
marketplaceDiff
2

1013

Bakos, J. Y. 2001. The emerging landscape for retail e-commerce.
J. Econ. Perspect. 15(1): 69–80.
Benjamin, R., R. Wigand. 1995. Electronic markets and virtual
value chains on the information superhighway. Sloan Manag.
Rev. 36(2): 62–72.
Bernstein, F., A. Federgruen. 2003. Pricing and replenishment
strategies in a distribution system with competing retailers.
Oper. Res. 51(3): 409–426.
Bernstein, F., A. Federgruen. 2004. A general equilibrium model
for industries with price and service competition. Oper. Res.
52(6): 868–886.
Bernstein, F., A. Federgruen. 2005. Decentralized supply chains
with competing retailers under demand uncertainty. Manage.
Sci. 51(1): 18–29.
Bernstein, F., J. Song, X. Zheng. 2008. “Bricks-and-mortar” vs.
“clicks-and-mortar”: An equilibrium analysis. Eur. J. Oper.
Res., 187(3): 671–690.
Bhargava, H. K., V. Choudhary. 2004. Economics of an information intermediary with aggregation benefits. Inf. Sys. Res. 15
(1): 22–36.
Birge, J. R., J. Drogosz, I. Duenyas. 1998. Setting single-period
optimal capacity levels and prices for substitutable products.
Int. J. Flex. Manuf. Sys. 10(4): 407–430.
Boyaci, T. 2005. Competitive stocking and coordination in a
multiple-channel distribution system. IIE Trans. 37(5): 407–
427.
Bryant, J. 1980. Competitive equilibrium with price setting firms
and stochastic demand. Int. Econ. Rev. 21(3): 619–626.
Cachon, G., M. Lariviere. 2005. Supply chain coordination with
revenue-sharing contracts: Strengths and limitations. Manage.
Sci. 51(1): 30–44.
Cattani, K., W. Gilland, S. Heese, J. M. Swaminathan. 2006. Boiling frogs: Pricing strategy for a manufacturer adding a direct
channel that competes with the traditional channel. Prod.
Oper. Manag. 15(1): 40–57.
Chatterjee, P. 2002. Interfirm alliances in online retailing. J. Bus.
Res. 57: 714–723.
Chiang, W. K., D. Chhajed, J. D. Hess. 2003. Direct marketing,
indirect profits: A strategic analysis of dual-channel supplychain design. Manage. Sci. 49(1): 1–20.
Chiu, C.-H., T.-M. Choi, C. S. Tang. 2011. Price, rebate, and
returns, supply contracts for coordinating supply chains with
price dependent demands. Prod. Oper. Manag. 20(1): 81–91.
Choi, S. C. 1996. Price competition in a duopoly common retailer
channel. J. Retail. 72(2): 117–134.
Choudhury, V., K. S. Hartzel, B. R. Konsynski. 1998. Uses and
consequences of electronic markets: An empirical investigation in the aircraft parts industry. MIS Quar. 22(4): 471–
507.
Dana, J., K. Spier. 2001. Revenue sharing and vertical control in
the video rental industry. J. Ind. Econ. 59(3): 223–245.

http://www.amazonservices.com/promerchant>ld=AZSOA
MakeM

Dumrongsiri, A., M. Fan, A. Jain, K. Moinzadeh. 2008. A supply
chain model with direct and retail channels. Eur. J. Oper. Res.
187(3): 691–718.

References
Adler, L. 1966. Symbiotic marketing. Harv. Bus. Rev. 44: 59–71.

Geng, Q., S. Mallik. 2007. Inventory competition and allocation in
a multi-channel distribution system. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 182(2):
704–729.

Bakos, J. Y. 1991a. Information links and electronic marketplaces:
The role of interorganizational information systems in vertical
markets. J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 8(2): 31–52.

Greiger, M. 2003. Electronic marketplaces: A literature review and
a call for supply chain management research. Eur. J. Oper.
Res. 144(2): 280–294.

Bakos, J. Y. 1991b. A strategic analysis of electronic marketplaces.
MIS Quar. 15(3): 295–310.
Bakos, J. Y. 1997. Reducing buyer search costs: Implications for
electronic marketplaces. Manage. Sci. 43(12): 1676–1692.

Hagiu, A. 2007. Merchant or two-sided platform? Rev. Netw. Econ.
6(2): 115–133.
Hendershott, T., J. Zhang. 2006. A model of direct and intermediated sales. J. Econ. Manag. Strat. 15(2): 279–316.

1014

Ryan, Sun, and Zhao: Competition and Coordination in Online Marketplaces
Production and Operations Management 21(6), pp. 997–1014, © 2012 Production and Operations Management Society

Mangalindan, M. 2006. Game over: How Amazon’s dream
alliance with Toys ’R’ Us went so sour. Wall Street Journal,
January 23.

Wang, S., S. Zheng, L. Xu, D. Li, H. Meng. 2008. A literature review
of electronic marketplace research: Themes, theories and an
integrative framework. Inf. Sys. Front. 10(5): 555–571.

Pasternack, B. 2002. Using revenue sharing to achieve channel
coordination for a newsboy type inventory model. Geunes, J.,
P. Pardalos, H. E. Romeijn, eds. Supply Chain Management:
Models, Applications and Research. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 117–136.

Wang, Y., L. Jiang, Z.-J. Shen. 2004. Channel performance under
consignment contract with revenue sharing. Manage. Sci. 50
(1): 34–47.

Ru, J., Y. Wang. 2010. Consignment contracting: Who should
control inventory in the supply chain?. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 201
(3): 760–769.
Seifert, R. W., U. W. Thonemann, M. A. Sieke. 2006. Relaxing
channel separation: Integrating a virtual store into the supply
chain via transshipments. IIE Trans. 38(11): 917–931.
Strader, T. J., M. J. Shaw. 1997. Characteristics of electronic
markets. Decis. Support Syst. 21(3): 185–198.
Su, X., S. K. Mukhopadhyay. 2012. Controlling power retailer’s
gray activities through contract design. Prod. Oper. Manag. 21
(1): 145–160.
Tsay, A., N. Agrawal. 2004. Channel conflict and coordination in
the e-commerce age. Prod. Oper. Manag. 13(1): 93–110.
Vardarajan, P. R., D. Rajaratnam. 1986. Symbiotic marketing revisited. J. Market. 50(1): 7–17.

Wu, C., S. Mallik. 2010. Cross sales in supply chains: An equilibrium analysis. Int. J. Prod. Econ. 126(2): 158–167.

Supporting Information
Additional Supporting Information may be found in the
online version of this article:
Appendix S1: Figures 5 and 6.
Please note: Wiley-Blackwell is not responsible for the content or functionality of any supporting materials supplied by
the authors. Any queries (other than missing material) should
be directed to the corresponding author for the article.

