Vol. 27, No. 8, August 2018, pp. 1595–1610
ISSN 1059-1478|EISSN 1937-5956|18|2708|1595

DOI 10.1111/poms.12885
© 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

Marketplace, Reseller, or Hybrid: Strategic Analysis of
an Emerging E-Commerce Model
Lin Tian*
School of Management, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China, ltian11@fudan.edu.cn

Asoo J. Vakharia
Department of Information Systems & Operations Management, Warrington College of Business Administration, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida 32611-7169, USA, asoov@ufl.edu

Yinliang (Ricky) Tan
A. B. Freeman School of Business, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70118, USA, ytan2@tulane.edu

Yifan Xu
School of Management, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China, yfxu@fudan.edu.cn

raditionally, online retailers have acted as product resellers. Recently, these retailers have also started to serve as
online marketplaces by providing a platform to directly connect sellers with buyers. Over and above re-shaping the
traditional e-commerce market, conventional wisdom suggests that this new format will mitigate the double-marginalization effect and benefit both the intermediary and suppliers through a revenue sharing scheme. However, we find that
upstream competition between suppliers critically moderates this possibility. We also find that the interaction of order-fulfillment costs and upstream competition intensity moderates the selection of an optimal mode for the intermediary. More
specifically, when order-fulfillment costs are large and when the supplier product offerings are similar (i.e., competition
intensity is high), the pure reseller mode is the preferred choice; when order-fulfillment costs are small and the supplier
product offerings are highly differentiated (i.e., low competition intensity), the pure marketplace mode is the preferred
choice. Finally, the hybrid mode is preferred when order-fulfillment costs are moderate and suppliers’ products are somewhat similar (i.e., competition intensity is moderate). The intuition behind these results hinges on the trade-off between
transfer of pricing rights and the responsibility for order fulfillment. Our findings not only complement the emerging
online marketplace literature but also provide testable empirical questions concerning the relationship and magnitude of
different factors steering the mode choice.

T

Key words: online marketplace; channel structure; upstream competition; order-fulfillment cost
History: Received: December 2017; Accepted: April 2018 by Subodha Kumar, after 3 revisions.

1. Introduction
Online retailers who have traditionally acted as resellers are starting to offer online markeplace services
providing a direct connection between buyers and
sellers. The success of online marketplaces is well
documented. For example, direct sales from suppliers
accounted for 45% of units sold on Amazon.com in
the second quarter of 2015, and leading Chinese
online retailer JD.com reports that sales through its
online marketplace grew at a rate higher than its projection at 40%. Perhaps this is what has driven online
retailers who were originally resellers to add an
online marketplace (e.g., Amazon, JD.com, Gome) to
expand their product offering options for the consumer. However, note that neither Amazon nor JD.
com is moving forward to the pure marketplace

mode. For example, Amazon and its marketplace sellers offered a total of 353,710,754 different products,
and Amazon itself carried 12,231,203 in May 2016.1
Further, some online retailers (e.g., BestBuy.com) are
still working as pure resellers. More interestingly,
there are also examples of retailers (such as Zappos.
com) that started as online markeplaces, but have
now switched completely to the reseller mode. The
underlying motivation for these alternative modes is
not always clear.
In the reselling mode, online retailers purchase
products from suppliers for a wholesale price, then
determine retail prices for consumers. In contrast, in
the online marketplace mode, suppliers determine
retail prices and share revenue with the online retailer. The online retailer does not incur any direct
inventory or delivery costs, but it loses the flexibility

1595

1596

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model
Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

of setting market prices. Of course, it is also possible
for the online retailer to adopt a hybrid configuration
mode; that is, for some products they act as resellers
and for others they serve as an online marketplace.
Regardless of the chosen channel mode, online retailers often offer products from competing suppliers,
which necessitates an integration of upstream competition in the chain. From an efficiency perspective,
there is also a need to consider costs related to inventory, storage, and transportation; we refer to these as
“order-fulfillment costs.” According to a recent report
in the Wall Street Journal (Kapner 2014), the cost of fulfillment operations can run as high as 25% of the sales
revenue. The adopted channel mode also affects
whether the online retailer bears these costs (reseller
mode) or whether they are borne by the suppliers (online marketplace mode).
These observations motivate the research of this
study which is to address the following general question: Should online retailers operate as resellers,
online marketplaces, or adopt both modes of operation? Which mode would be preferred for suppliers?
The focus of this study is to examine the desirability
of these platform choices for the online intermediary.
More specifically, we investigate the impact of
upstream (supplier) competition and fulfillment (inventory and delivery) costs on intermediary and supplier profitability across three mutually exclusive
platform modes: (a) Reseller Mode for both suppliers,
(b) Hybrid Mode, where one supplier operates under
the reseller format while the other operates as a direct
seller through an online marketplace, and (c) Online
Marketplace Mode for both suppliers. Our study
helps to shed light on why different online platforms
adopt different selling modes and determine the key
drivers of different proportional fees based on product category.
There is an emerging stream of literature that discusses the importance of the strategic contract choices
between resellers and online marketplaces with a
focus on trade-offs between these two distinct pure
modes. Prior research addressing this general question has focused on information asymmetry (Jiang
et al. 2011), positive or negative cross-channel effects
(Abhishek et al. 2016), complementary relationships
between products and devices (Hao and Fan 2014),
online product reviews (Young et al. 2014), control
rights of marketing activity (Hagiu and Wright 2015),
and downstream competition (Tan et al. 2016). Our
focus is completely different, as we provide insights
into how both upstream competition and order-fulfillment costs moderate the choice of channel mode for
the online intermediary.
The key findings of our study can be summarized
as follows. As opposed to the monopoly setting,
where the marketplace mode will dominate the

reseller mode, our analysis reveals that upstream
competition intensity and order-fulfillment costs are
two interacting forces steering the mode choice of the
online retailer. Essentially, in the reseller mode, the
intermediary can function as a moderator to alleviate
the fierce price competition in the online marketplace.
Specifically, when the order-fulfillment cost is relatively small and the competition intensity is low, the
pure marketplace mode will become the preferred
choice; when the order-fulfillment cost is relatively
high or the competition is sufficiently intense, then
the pure reseller mode is the preferred choice. The
hybrid mode is the preferred choice when order-fulfillment costs and competition intensity are both at
moderate levels. The intuition hinges on the trade-off
between the intensity of the price competition due to
the transfer of the pricing right and the responsibility
of bearing the order-fulfillment cost accompanied by
the mode change.
Our findings also suggest that the revenue-sharing
scheme adopted by many online platforms (i.e., online
marketplace mode) does not always outperform the
traditional reseller model. This result holds when the
upstream competition is very intense or the order-fulfillment cost is high. This implies that depending upon
upstream competition intensity and magnitude of
order fulfillment costs, online intermediaries should
design different contract terms for distinct product categories. For example, instead of allowing the suppliers
to sell on its website, Amazon can become the reseller
in certain highly competitive product categories, such
as electronics. On the other hand, it is more profitable
for Amazon to serve as a marketplace for other less
competitive product categories, such as fine art (i.e.,
long-tail product category). For print books (with high
order-fulfillment costs), Amazon should serve as a
reseller, while for e-books (with low order-fulfillment
costs), Amazon should choose to operate as an online
marketplace. Thus, the revenue sharing proportion
(and associated bounds) are useful to encourage or
discourage the adoption of the online marketplace
mode by suppliers.
The remainder of this study is organized as follows.
In the next section, we review and examine how our
study relates to relevant literature. This is followed by
a description of our model and analysis in sections 3
and 4, respectively. Section 5 presents the main
insights of our results. Section 6 concludes the paper
with a summary and possible avenues for future
research. All proofs can be found in the Online
Appendix.

2. Relevant Literature
This study contributes to the emerging research literature that focuses on the strategic mode choice

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model
Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

between suppliers and online retailers, and aims to
reveal the trade-offs between the two distinct pure
modes (i.e., reseller and online marketplace). One of
the key aspects in this context is the cross-channel
effect. This effect is a result of suppliers offering
goods through multiple channels, potentially leading
sales in one channel to impact sales in another channel. In the presence of spillovers between channels,
different selling modes will elicit different reactions
from suppliers, because the sales through new channels would impact suppliers’ sales in the traditional
channel (Brynjolfsson et al. 2009). Abhishek et al.
(2016) study a setting with one supplier and two
online intermediaries, and find that the online intermediary prefers to use the marketplace mode if the
sales through the intermediary lead to a negative
effect on demand of the supplier’s traditional channel,
and vice versa. They also show that such preferences
are moderated by competition among intermediaries.
In contrast, in our study, we examine competition
between suppliers.
Hagiu and Wright (2015) focus on a single decision
variable, the level of demand-enhancing marketing
activity, which is controlled by suppliers in the pure
marketplace mode but by the intermediary in the
pure reseller mode. They assume information asymmetry such that each supplier has information on the
impact of market activities on demand while the
intermediary and other suppliers do not. Their results
indicate that the pure marketplace mode is preferred
if and only if the variance of the private information
exceeds the squared value of spillovers from marketing activities across products. In their model, suppliers are only charged a fixed membership fee in the
pure marketplace mode. However, in reality, there is
usually a small fixed participation fee plus a large
proportional revenue sharing fee. By contrast, we
endogenize the revenue sharing fee, and examine
how the online intermediary can manipulate this fee
to encourage or discourage the adoption of the online
marketplace mode for the suppliers.
Jiang et al. (2011) also consider the impacts of
demand-enhancing marketing activities and information asymmetry. They focus on the strategic underselling behavior of sellers on platforms rather than
the strategic mode choice we consider in this study.
Other issues of interest have been explored in prior
research on online marketplaces. Hao and Fan (2014)
focus on the publishing industry and show that ebook prices are lower in the pure reseller mode due to
the existence of a complementary market (i.e., e-book
readers). Young et al. (2014) show that channel mode
choice can be used as a strategic tool to benefit from
third-party product reviews. More recently, Tan et al.
(2016) and Tan and Carrillo (2017) illustrate that the
mechanism of the online marketplace can benefit both

1597

the upstream supplier and the retailer in the digital
publishing industry.
Our study differs from the aforementioned studies
in four key aspects. First, we explicitly consider
upstream supplier competition in identifying an equilibrium configuration mode for the online retailer. We
believe this is a critical aspect since most online retailers simultaneously offer substitute products from
competing suppliers. Second, since the configuration
mode impacts the order-fulfillment costs borne by different supply chain members, we also integrate this
critical aspect in our setting. As indicated earlier,
these costs are a significant portion of the total channel costs. Third, practice indicates that some online
retailers operate as both resellers and online marketplaces for the same product category. This drives us
to explicitly include such a hybrid configuration
mode in our comparisons. Fourth, we endogenize the
equilibrium mode choice within the interactions
between the suppliers and the online intermediary,
and also the proportional fee for the suppliers under
the online marketplace mode.
Our study also contributes to the research literature
on channel structure. Early work on market channels
concerned whether suppliers are better off using independent intermediaries instead of vertical integration
(e.g., Choi 1991, Coughlan 1985, McGuire and Staelin
1983, Trivedi 1998). A common result is that the existence of independent intermediaries is able to mitigate the competition among suppliers. For example,
McGuire and Staelin (1983) consider the partial substitutability between two products from two suppliers
selling through exclusive retailers. They conclude that
suppliers prefer to use independent intermediaries
when the degree of substitutability is high, and prefer
company-owned stores otherwise. Coughlan (1985)
discusses the problem of choosing a vertical marketing channel in a product-differentiated duopoly market, and shows that integration of the marketing
function results in greater price competition and
lower prices than the use of independent marketing
middlemen.
Another stream of research on channel structure
examines the impact of introducing an online direct
channel in addition to an existing retail channel. Chiang et al. (2003) have argued that the introduction of
the direct channel may benefit the retailer through a
reduction of the wholesale price. Tsay and Agrawal
(2004a) have confirmed that result in a different setting by considering various sources of inefficiency.
Cai (2010) and Cai et al. (2012) explore the impact of
multiple channel structures and revenue sharing
schemes to the supplier, the retailer, and the supply
chain. Recent research has considered the rationale of
selling through online platforms. For example, Ryan
et al. (2012) consider a setting with a supplier who

1598

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model
Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

sells goods through its own direct sale website and
has the option of selling its goods through an online
platform. They assume that selling through the platform system can attract more customers to the supplier’s own website, but at some expense, e.g., a fixed
participation fee or proportional fee charged by the
online platform. Interested readers are referred to
Cattani et al. (2004) and Tsay and Agrawal (2004b) for
more comprehensive reviews.
Our study on strategic mode choice between suppliers and online retailers differs from the stream of
market channel literature in three ways. First, in prior
research, the online retailer/intermediary is assumed
to function as a reseller. In our study, under the online
marketplace mode, the intermediary acts as an agent,
charging a proportional fee for each sale. Shy and
Wang (2011) suggest that such a fee could be regarded
as a revenue sharing mechanism that may mitigate
double marginalization. Second, the focus of our
study is identifying which selling mode is more beneficial for online intermediaries, rather than a comparison of direct/indirect selling activities. Third, we
explicitly examine how the order-fulfillment cost and
upstream competition, two significant but unexplored
factors, determine the mode configuration choice.
Our research also complements the stream of literature on store-within-store in an offline setting (e.g.,
Jerath and Zhang 2010, Netemeyer et al. 2012), where
retailers essentially rent out their retail space to suppliers and give them complete autonomy over retail
decisions like pricing and in-store services. Our study
of online marketplaces differs from this literature
stream in two ways. First, in store-within-store contracts, suppliers typically manage all retail decisions,
and the retailers charge them a fixed periodic rent
(Jerath and Zhang 2010). Our work suggests that a
proportional/revenue sharing fee could be a viable
alternative in this setting. Through guidelines on proportional fees (a) (i.e., the revenue sharing proportion
that the online retailers can keep), we show that
online retailers can set the value of a to encourage or
discourage the adoption of the online marketplace
mode for the suppliers. As noted by Cachon and Lariviere (2005), revenue sharing contract is very difficult
to implement in the offline setting. However, this is
not the case for the online marketplace setting, which
is analogous to the store-within-store model. Second,
we show that order-fulfillment costs and upstream
competition jointly determine the optimal mode configuration choice for online retailers. To the best of
our knowledge, the literature on the store-withinstore setting has largely neglected the impacts of these
two significant but unexplored factors.
In summary, the key aspects of our paper (e.g., the
proportional-fee/revenue-sharing fee, the order-fulfillment cost, and the upstream competition between

suppliers) have not been thoroughly explored in the
extant store-within-store literature. Thus, our findings
regarding the online marketplace can also provide
useful insights into store-within-store settings. In the
next section, we turn to a description of our modeling
framework.

3. Modeling Framework
We consider a stylized supply chain consisting of two
competing suppliers (A and B) selling two substitutable products (A sells product a, B sells product b)
through a common online intermediary (I). Given that
the products are substitutable, we follow established
norms in the marketing and operations literature
(e.g., Birge et al. 1998, Choi 1991, Gal-Or et al. 2008,
Garcia-Gallego and Georgantzis 2001, Li and Zhang
2008, McGuire and Staelin 1983) and our demand
function is:2
da ¼ h  pa þ cðpb  pa Þ

ð1Þ

db ¼ h  pb þ cðpa  pb Þ

ð2Þ

where di and pi refer to the realized demand and
retail prices for product i(=a, b), respectively, and h
denotes the market potential. c > 0 is the measure of
the intensity of price competition with higher values
indicating a greater degree of product substitution
and greater intensity of price competition.3 Our
entire analysis, without loss of generality, assumes
that production costs for suppliers are normalized
to be equal to zero. For ease of exposition, we use
the pronoun “he” to represent the intermediary, and
“she” to denote the suppliers in the remainder of
the study.
Three alternative mode choices evaluated are as
follows:

•

•
•

Reseller Mode RR: Under mode RR, the intermediary acts as a reseller for both suppliers.
Since many online intermediaries (e.g., Amazon and JD.com) were historically pure resellers, we set RR mode to be the benchmark
(current) mode.
Hybrid Mode PR: This mode represents a setting where the intermediary acts as a marketplace for one supplier (suppose Supplier A) by
specifying a proportional fee a and acts as a
reseller for the other supplier (Supplier B).
Online Marketplace Mode PP: In direct contrast to mode RR, under this mode, the intermediary specifies a proportional fee a to both
suppliers and acts as a marketplace for both
suppliers.

Following industry practice, the intermediary acts
as a Stackelberg leader in terms of whether she will

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model
Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

act as a reseller or marketplace for one or both suppliers. The suppliers, as followers, accept or reject the
intermediary’s offer. In determining the equilibrium
outcomes, for each alternative mode, the conditions
under which suppliers will accept the intermediary’s
mode choice are explicitly incorporated.
Based on this discussion, it is apparent that the possible existence of each mode of operation is driven by
the intermediary’s operational offering (e.g., the proportional fee a) and the suppliers’ willingness to
accept this offer. Assuming the existence of each
mode, the interaction between the intermediary and
suppliers is illustrated in Figure 1. The sequence of
events for each mode of operation is as follows.
Mode RR: In this benchmark (current) mode, the
intermediary has decided not to offer the online
marketplace service and acts as a reseller for both
suppliers. Suppliers start by simultaneously
offering wholesale prices wa and wb to the intermediary who in turn simultaneously sets retail
prices pa and pb for the consumers.
Mode PR: In this mode, the intermediary has
offered to act as a marketplace for Supplier A by
specifying a proportional fee a, and still acts as a
reseller for Supplier B. Assuming Supplier A
accepts the online marketplace offer and Supplier B chooses to continue participating under

•

•

Figure 1

•

1599

the reseller format, then based on the quoted
wholesale price wb from Supplier B, both Supplier A and the intermediary simultaneously set
the retail prices pa and pb, respectively.
Mode PP: In this mode, the intermediary has
offered the online marketplace service to both
suppliers by specifying the proportional fee a.
Assuming both suppliers accept the offer, then
both of them determine the retail prices pa and
pb simultaneously.

Note that, under the marketplace service, the intermediary yields the pricing power to the supplier. The
intermediary receives a commission in proportion to
the supplier’s revenue at a rate of a, which is determined by the intermediary. All three modes are analyzed under a complete information setting.
The proportion a is specified as a referral fee by
some online intermediaries (Geng et al. 2018). This
proportional fee, although different across product
categories, is the same for all products within a certain category. Empirical data indicates that common a
values range from 6% to 25% of the sale price depending on the product category on Amazon, while for
JD.com, the fee for most product categories ranges
from 5% to 12%. In addition to this proportional fee,
some intermediaries also charge a fixed subscription

Channel Modes: RR, PR and PP [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]

1600

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model
Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

fee. For example, Amazon Marketplace charges a
$39.99 monthly subscription fee for sellers who plan
to sell more than 40 items a month. Sears.com also
charges a $39.99 fee to suppliers whose sales are over
$400 during one month. Because this fee is relatively
small compared with the suppliers’ sales volume,
without loss of generality, we normalize this fixed fee
part to zero. Previous literature has also adopted this
assumption (Abhishek et al. 2016).
Order fulfillment, that is, delivering physical goods
to the customer, is commonly cited as one of the most
expensive and critical operations of online sellers
(Agatz et al. 2008). The cost of order fulfillment can
run as high as 25% of sales (Kapner 2014). To fulfill an
order, firms take on costs such as warehouse building/renting costs, hiring staff to handle packages, and
delivering the products to customers. The costs of storage and hiring staff are quite significant and can be
viewed as fixed cost. Meanwhile, the delivery cost for
online shopping is usually undertaken by the customers. For ease of exposition, we assume that orderfulfillment costs are fixed, since we find that the key
insights stemming from our analysis are similar even
if these costs are a function of the number of orders
received.4 Essentially, if the intermediary functions as
a reseller, he will incur a fixed cost FI > 0 to fulfill the
order for per product category (product a or b); if the
intermediary functions as an online marketplace, each
supplier must be responsible for a fixed cost FS > 0 to
fulfill orders. Through analysis, we find that if the
intermediary’s order-fulfillment cost is lower than the
supplier’s order-fulfillment cost (i.e., FI < FS), the equilibrium mode is more likely to be the pure reseller
mode, and vice versa. To eliminate the possibility that
the equilibrium mode is driven by the asymmetric cost
structure, we assume FI = FS = F in our base model.
More specifically, in mode RR, the intermediary bears
order-fulfillment costs for both product categories (i.e.,
2F); in mode PR, Supplier A bears the order-fulfillment
cost (F) for its product and the intermediary bears the
order-fulfillment cost (F) for reselling Supplier B’s product; in mode PP, both Supplier A and Supplier B bear
the order-fulfillment cost (F) of their own product category.5 Recently, some online intermediaries (e.g.,
Amazon, Sears, JD, etc.) and 3rd party online order fulfillment service providers have offered an option to
suppliers that allows them to outsource their order fulfillment. In this case, the supplier will pay some fees
for order fulfillment; that is, even if the supplier outsources the order fulfillment, he still needs to bear the
related costs. For ease of exposition and without loss
of generality, we focus on the case that suppliers will
fulfill the order in-house in our base model.6
In the next section, the equilibrium outcomes of
each channel mode are structurally characterized.

4. Equilibrium Analysis
The first set of results described below is our benchmark (current) setting where the intermediary acts as
a reseller for both suppliers (mode RR). Next, we consider the setting where one supplier switches to the
online marketplace mode while the other supplier still
adopts the reseller mode (model PR). Finally, we
focus on the case in which both suppliers choose to
accept the intermediary terms and switch to the
online marketplace mode (mode PP). In deriving
these results, the necessary conditions for the existence of each operating mode (i.e., RR, PR, and PP)
are that the equilibrium profits for each supplier are
at least as large as the profits each supplier could realize through exercising an outside option (denoted by
pO).
4.1. Mode RR
Under this setting, the suppliers simultaneously
quote wholesale prices (wa and wb) and then the intermediary (who bears the order-fulfillment costs for
both products) determines the retail prices pa and pb.
The profits for the suppliers and the intermediary are
as follows:
pA ðRRÞ ¼ wa ½h  pa þ cðpb  pa Þ;
pB ðRRÞ ¼ wb ½h  pb þ cðpa  pb Þ;
pI ðRRÞ ¼ ðpa  wa Þ½h  pa þ cðpb  pa Þ
þ ðpb  wb Þ½h  pb þ cðpa  pb Þ  2F:
We solve this game by backward induction. For
any given wholesale prices wa and wb, we first characterize the equilibrium retail prices that would maximize pI(RR). We then determine the wholesale prices
for the suppliers by simultaneously maximizing their
individual profit functions.
LEMMA 1. There exists a unique equilibrium for mode
RR. The equilibrium prices and demands are as follows:
1
h;
2þc
3þc
h;
¼
2ð2 þ cÞ
1þc
h;
¼
2ð2 þ cÞ

RR
wRR
a ¼ wb ¼
RR
pRR
a ¼ pb
RR
dRR
a ¼ db

and the corresponding optimal profits are given by:
RR
pRR
A ¼ pB ¼

pRR
I ¼

1þc
2ð2 þ cÞ2
ð1 þ cÞ2
2ð2 þ cÞ2

h2 ;

h2  2F:

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model

1601

Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

It is straightforward to note that an increase in
competition intensity (c) would lead to an increase
in the intermediary’s profit and a simultaneous
decrease in supplier profits, since an increase in c
reduces the suppliers’ pricing power relative to
that of the intermediary. The profit for each supplier under this RR benchmark mode serves as a
base for evaluating whether a supplier would
choose the online marketplace if it was offered by
the intermediary.
The technical condition for the existence of the
RR mode and its corresponding equilibrium is that
the supplier’s profit under this mode is at least as
large as the profit that each supplier could realize
by exercising the outside option, that is,
1þc
2
RR
pO  pRR
A ¼ pB ¼ 2ð2 þ cÞ2 h . Given that the reseller
mode is adopted by a large number of suppliers
selling through online intermediaries, this existence condition is assumed to hold for the remainder of this study.
4.2. Mode PR
In this setting, only one supplier will be offered
the option of the online marketplace mode from
the intermediary. Hence, one supplier adopts the
online marketplace mode if accepted, while the
other retains the reseller mode. Without loss of
generality, we assume that the online marketplace
option is accepted by Supplier A, and the intermediary operates as a reseller for Supplier B. For a
given proportion a, the suppliers’ and intermediary’s profits are:

pPR
a ¼
pPR
b ¼
dPR
a ¼

þ ðpb  wb Þ½h  pb þ cðpa  pb Þ  F:
We solve this game by backward induction as follows. For any given wb, we first characterize the
simultaneous pricing decision where Supplier A decides the retail price of product a (i.e., pa) to maximize
pA(PR), and the intermediary decides the retail price
of product b (i.e., pb) to maximize pI(PR). Next we
determine Supplier B’s wholesale price wb to maximize pB(PR). Finally, using this wholesale price wb,
the optimal retail prices pa and pb can be set. The
results of this analysis are presented in the lemma
below.
LEMMA 2. Given a proportion a and Supplier A accepting the offer of an online marketplace while the intermediary serves as a reseller for Supplier B, there exists a
unique equilibrium with prices and demands are as
follows:

h;
½4ð1 þ cÞ2  ð1 þ aÞc2 ð4 þ 8c þ 2c2 Þ
ð3 þ 6c þ 2c2 Þð2 þ 3cÞ þ að1 þ c  c2 Þc

h;
½4ð1 þ cÞ2  ð1 þ aÞc2 ð2 þ 4c þ c2 Þ
ð4 þ 9c þ 3c2 Þð1 þ cÞð2 þ 3cÞ  að1 þ cÞð1 þ 2cÞc2

½4ð1 þ cÞ2  ð1 þ aÞc2 ð4 þ 8c þ 2c2 Þ
ð1 þ cÞð2 þ 3cÞ  að1 þ 2cÞc
dPR
h;
b ¼
2½4ð1 þ cÞ2  ð1 þ aÞc2 

h;

and the corresponding equilibrium profits are:
pPR
A ¼
ð1  aÞ
pPR
B ¼

ð1 þ cÞ½ð4 þ 9c þ 3c2 Þð2 þ 3cÞ  að1 þ 2cÞc2 2
½4ð1 þ cÞ2  ð1 þ aÞc2 2 ð4 þ 8c þ 2c2 Þ2
½ð1 þ cÞð2 þ 3cÞ  að1 þ 2cÞc2

2ð1 þ cÞ½4ð1 þ cÞ2  ð1 þ aÞc2 ð4 þ 8c þ 2c2 Þ

pPR
I ¼a

h2  F;

h2 ;

ð1 þ cÞ½ð4 þ 9c þ 3c2 Þð2 þ 3cÞ  að1 þ 2cÞc2 2
"

þ

½4ð1 þ cÞ2  ð1 þ aÞc2 2 ð4 þ 8c þ 2c2 Þ2

h2
#

½ð1 þ cÞð2 þ 3cÞ  að1 þ 2cÞc
2ð1 þ cÞ½4ð1 þ cÞ2  ð1 þ aÞc2 2 ð4 þ 8c þ 2c2 Þ

Mh2  F;
where:
M ¼ ½ð1 þ cÞð2 þ 3cÞð2 þ 4c þ c2 Þ þ að1 þ cÞð2 þ 3cÞc2
þ að3 þ 4cÞð2 þ 4c þ c2 Þc  a2 ð1 þ 2cÞc3 :

pA ðPRÞ ¼ ð1  aÞpa ½h  pa þ cðpb  pa Þ  F;
pB ðPRÞ ¼ wb ½h  pb þ cðpa  pb Þ;
pI ðPRÞ ¼ apa ½h  pa þ cðpb  pa Þ

ð1 þ cÞð2 þ 3cÞ  að1 þ 2cÞc
h;
2ð1 þ cÞð2 þ 4c þ c2 Þ
ð4 þ 9c þ 3c2 Þð2 þ 3cÞ  að1 þ 2cÞc2

wPR
b ¼

For the equilibrium in Lemma 2 to exist, the following proposition characterizes the sufficient conditions
under which Supplier A will accept the intermediary’s marketplace offer and Supplier B will continue
to participate under the reseller mode.
PROPOSITION 1. Supplier A will accept the intermediary’s
RR
offer of an online marketplace provided pPR
A  pA , and
Supplier B will continue to participate under the reseller
O
mode provided pPR
B  p . This leads to the following sufficient conditions for the existence of the PR mode:

•
•

F ≤ FPR;
where
1þc
2
h ; and
2ð2 þ cÞ2

FPR ¼

PR
a  aPR ¼ min½aPR
A ; aB ,
unique
solution

ð4 þ 9c þ 3c2 Þ2 ð1 þ cÞ
ð2 þ cÞ2 ð4 þ 8c þ 2c2 Þ2

where
of

h2 

aPR
is the
A
ð1  aPR
A Þ

ð1 þ cÞ½ð4 þ 9c þ 3c2 Þð2 þ 3cÞ  aPR
ð1 þ 2cÞc2 2 2
A
h 
2 2 ð4 þ 8c þ 2c2 Þ2
½4ð1 þ cÞ2  ð1 þ aPR
Þc
A
h2 and aPR
is the unique
B
2
½ð1 þ cÞð2 þ 3cÞ  aPR
B ð1 þ 2cÞc
h2 ¼
2 ð4 þ 8c þ 2c2 Þ
2ð1 þ cÞ½4ð1 þ cÞ2  ð1 þ aPR
Þc
B

F ¼

1þc
2ð2 þ cÞ2

solution
p .
O

of

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model

1602

Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

Proposition 1 characterizes the conditions under
which Supplier A will accept the intermediary’s marketplace offer, and Supplier B will not pursue the outside option but continue to participate under the
reseller mode. The first condition relates to the orderfulfillment cost, which should not exceed a certain
threshold. Recall that by choosing the online marketplace service, the supplier gains pricing power but
bears the order-fulfillment cost at the same time.
Thus, this threshold value of the fulfillment cost
reflects the trade-off between gains from the pricing
power and the costs (in terms of order fulfillment) of
realizing such gains.
Assuming the first condition is satisfied, the proposition then specifies a second condition related to the
maximum proportion a, which can be charged to the
supplier by the intermediary. Interesting insights
regarding this proportion a are shown in Lemma 3.
pPR
I

LEMMA 3. (i)
increases in a whereas both
pPR
decrease
in
a;
(ii)
aPR decreases in F.
B

pPR
A

and

Lemma 3(i) indicates that an increase in a will
increase the intermediary’s profit pPR
I and simultaneously decrease Supplier A’s profit pPR
A . Hence a
RR
should be small (i.e., a  aPR
)
to
ensure
pPR
A
A  pA so
that Supplier A will accept the intermediary’s marketplace offer. Meanwhile, a counterintuitive result is
that an increase in a would also lead to a reduction in
the profit of the other supplier (B), who has not been
offered the online marketplace service. The reason for
this negative spillover effect is that when a is
increased, the supplier (A) tends to increase the price,
as the intermediary will keep a higher proportion of
the revenue. More specifically, when the intermediary
raises the proportion a she can keep, Supplier A
responds by charging higher retail prices. In response,
the intermediary sets a higher retail price for Supplier
B’s product, leading to lower demand for the same
product. The net result is lower profit for Supplier B.
Thus a needs to be small enough (a  aPR
B ) so that
Supplier B will not pursue the outside option but continue to participate under the reseller mode or
O 7
pPR
B  p . In equilibrium, assuming the condition
related to the order-fulfillment cost is met (i.e.,
F ≤ FPR), then the intermediary will set a ¼ aPR ¼
PR
min½aPR
A ; aB  since this will allow the intermediary to
extract the maximum profits from the supplier. Further, Lemma 3(ii) shows that this threshold value of
the proportional fee (i.e., aPR) is decreasing in the
order-fulfillment cost (F).
In summary, from a managerial perspective, our
results indicate that the intermediary requires a
strategic focus in choosing the parameters for offering
the online marketplace service. This service will only
be attractive to suppliers provided the order-

fulfillment cost is not significantly high. If this is the
case, then the intermediary should set the proportion
a equal to its upper bound in order to realize the maximum profits. From a supplier perspective, the online
marketplace offering is preferred over the reseller setting when the flexibility gains due to price setting outweigh the explicit costs of order fulfillment.
4.3. Mode PP
In this setting, both suppliers will be offered the
option of online marketplace from the intermediary.
If both suppliers choose the online marketplace service, they will take into consideration the proportion
a which they need to share with the intermediary. For
a given proportion a, the profits for each supplier and
the intermediary under this mode (i.e., both suppliers
choose the online marketplace service) are as follows:
pA ðPPÞ ¼ ð1  aÞpa ½h  pa þ cðpb  pa Þ  F;
pB ðPPÞ ¼ ð1  aÞpb ½h  pb þ cðpa  pb Þ  F;
pI ðPPÞ ¼ apa ½h  pa þ cðpb  pa Þ
þ apb ½h  pb þ cðpa  pb Þ:
We solve this game by simultaneously determining
the retail prices pa and pb which maximize pA(PP)
and pB(PP). The results are shown in the lemma
below.
LEMMA 4. Assuming both suppliers accept the proportion a, there exists a unique equilibrium with retail prices
and demands are as follows:
1
h;
2þc
1þc
h:
¼
2þc

PP
pPP
a ¼ pb ¼
PP
dPP
a ¼ db

The corresponding equilibrium profits are given by
PP
pPP
A ¼ pB ¼ ð1  aÞ

pPP
I

1þc

ð2 þ cÞ2
1þc 2
¼ 2a
h:
ð2 þ cÞ2

h2  F;

When is this mode a possible outcome? This can be
framed using the decision matrix in Table 1 where we
are interested in the equilibrium when both suppliers
will accept the online marketplace offer. This equilibrium will arise when both of the following conditions
hold: Given that Supplier B (A) adopts the reseller
model, Supplier A’s (B’s) profit should be higher
under the condition of acceptance than refusal of the
RR
intermediary’s marketplace offer, which is pPR
A  pA
RP
RR
(pB  pB ); given that Supplier B (A) adopts the
online marketplace, Supplier A’s (B’s) profit should

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model
Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

Table 1 Decision Matrix with Resulting Profits
Supplier B option
Supplier A option

Online marketplace

Reseller

Online marketplace

pPP
A ;

pPP
B

PR
pPR
A ; pB

Reseller

pRP
A ;

pRP
B

RR
pRR
A ; pB

RP
PR
RP
Note: Due to symmetry, we know that pPR
A ¼ pB , and pB ¼ pA

also be higher when it accepts rather than refuses the
RP
intermediary’s marketplace offer, which is pPP
A  pA
PP
PR
(pB  pB ). In addition, to ensure this equilibrium is
stable, both suppliers’ profits under the PP mode
should not be lower than the profit under the outside
O
PP
O
option, which is pPP
A  p (pB  p ). Based on the
results in Lemma 4, the following proposition identifies the conditions under which both suppliers will
not pursue the outside option but choose the online
marketplace service offering.
PROPOSITION 2. Both suppliers will choose the online
RR
PP
RP
marketplace service provided pPR
A  pA , pA  pA , and
PP
O
pA  p . This leads to the following sufficient conditions for the existence of the PP mode:

•
•

þ cÞð2 þ 3cÞ
F ≤ FPP; where FPP ¼ ð21þþcÞc 2 h2  2ð2 ð1
þ cÞð4 þ 8c þ 2c2 Þ
2
h ; and
PP
PP
PP
a  aPP ¼ minfaPR
A ; aA ; aB g; where aA is the
PP 1 þ c
unique solution of ð1  aA Þ ð2 þ cÞ2 h2  F ¼
½ð1 þ cÞð2 þ 3cÞ  aPP
ð1 þ 2cÞc2
A
h2 and
2ð1 þ cÞ½4ð1 þ cÞ2  ð1 þ aPP
Þc2 ð4 þ 8c þ 2c2 Þ
A
1þc
2
unique solution of ð1  aPP
B Þ ð2 þ cÞ2 h 

aPP
B is the
F ¼ pO .

Similar to the hybrid mode, both suppliers will
accept the intermediary’s online marketplace offer
when the order-fulfillment cost and the proportional
fee that the intermediary charges are all below a certain threshold. It is worth noting that the threshold in
order-fulfillment cost is more stringent than that stated
in Proposition 1, since FPP < FPR. As before, the interPP
mediary’s profit pPP
I increases in a, while both pA and
PP
pB decrease in a. In equilibrium, the intermediary is
once again incentivized to set a = aPP, which decreases
in the order-fulfillment cost (F). We also note that suppliers’ profits will decrease as the upstream competition intensifies (i.e., a higher value of c).
In the next section, we compare the equilibrium
solutions for the three modes with a view to providing managerial insights.

5. Insights
5.1. Pricing and Demand
From a pricing and demand perspective, the proposition below provides a comparison across the three
channel modes.

1603

PROPOSITION 3. Comparing the equilibrium results of
retail prices and demand, we have (i) pRR
¼
a
PR
PR
PP
PP
PR
PP
pRR
[
p
[
p
[
p
¼
p
;
(ii)
d
[
d
a
a
a
a ¼
b
b
b
RR
RR
PR
dPP
[
d
¼
d
[
d
.
a
b
b
b
Interestingly, the results of Proposition 3 are independent of the proportional fee rate a and hold regardless of the parameter settings for competition
intensity (c) and maximum market size (h). Essentially, market prices are highest in the pure reseller
mode since they are set by the intermediary who
attempts to moderate the competition between the
suppliers. On the other hand, when the suppliers set
the retail prices by operating in the online marketplace mode, they compete with each other directly,
leading to lower retail prices. Because of double
marginalization, in mode PR, the retail price of the
product that does not join the online marketplace is
higher than the price for which the supplier who
chooses to do so. Corresponding to these pricing
structures, demand coverage is higher in the online
marketplace mode (PP) as compared to the reseller
mode (RR).
5.2. Intermediary Profits
We now proceed to examine how intermediary profitability across the three modes is affected by two key
parameters: competition intensity (c) and order-fulfillment cost (F).8 To assess how these parameters affect
profitability of all supply chain members across the
three modes, we start by making the following
assumptions. First, we assume that the order-fulfillment cost is small enough to ensure that both mode
PR and PP are feasible. Analytically, the potential values of F under this assumption are that F < FPP(<FPR).
Note that the value of F which satisfies the first
assumption also leads both aPR and aPP to be positive.
Our second and final assumption is that the intermediary chooses to set a = aPR for mode PR and a = aPP
for mode PP, which represent equilibrium outcomes.
Proposition 4 structurally characterizes which
mode choice would be preferred by the intermediary, as moderated by the competition intensity
parameter c.
PROPOSITION 4. There exist competition intensity thresholds c > 0 and c (>c ) such that:

•
•
•

If c < c , the optimal mode is PP;
If c > c , the optimal mode is RR; and
If c ≤ c ≤ c mode PR can be the optimal mode.

Proposition 4 indicates that when competition
intensity is low, the optimal mode is PP; when competition intensity is high, the optimal mode is RR. In
addition, we observe that when competition intensity
is medium, the optimal mode is PR. The rationale

1604

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model
Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

behind these results hinges on the moderating role of
the intermediary. Previous literature has shown that
the intermediary prefers high levels of upstream competition, as it strengthens its channel power (Wang
and Shin 2015). From a mode perspective, suppliers
compete more fiercely in the online marketplace
mode compared with the reseller mode as they set the
prices directly and alternative modes allow the intermediary to moderate this competitive effect. To elaborate, when both suppliers are very competitive, the
intermediary would prefer to operate as a reseller,
since any other mode will lead to increased price competition which in turn negatively impacts the intermediary. This result validates the conjecture of Hagiu
(2007) that strong substitutability between suppliers’
products would lead to a greater preference for the
pure reseller mode. When the competition intensity
between suppliers is low, the intermediary’s moderating role is not as important. Note that in mode PP the
proportional fee could be considered a form of revenue sharing, which would mitigate the impact of
double-marginalization (Geng et al. 2018, Shy and
Wang 2011, Tan and Carrillo 2017). Hence, the intermediary prefers mode PP when competition intensity
is low. When the competition intensity between suppliers is in the intermediate range, the intermediary’s
moderating role is important but not significant
enough to alleviate double-marginalization effects,
leading to a preference for the hybrid mode PR.
Anecdotal observations provide face validity for
our results. For the household appliance market in
China, the similarity between branded products leads
to strong substitutability (or high competition intensity). Hence, most online retailers (e.g., JD.com) prefer
to act as resellers for products in this category. On the
other hand, the media content industry (publishing,
video games) is characterized by low levels of product substitutability (or low competition intensity).
This has motivated online retailers to set the terms for
the online marketplace mode in such a way that suppliers have chosen that mode of operation. Etsy.com,
the largest e-commerce website in handmade or vintage items, serves as a pure online marketplace
because of low product substitutability. Further,
Amazon serves as the reseller in certain high competitive product categories, such as electronics, but serves
as a marketplace for other less competitive product
categories, such as fine art (i.e., long-tail product
category).
Next, we consider the impact of the order-fulfillment cost on the choice of equilibrium mode for the
intermediary. Note that Proposition 4 shows that
when the market competition intensity is above a certain threshold, the intermediary will always prefer to
act as a reseller. To investigate the impact of the
order-fulfillment cost, next we focus on the case that

the market competition intensity is not too high. The
proposition below characterizes the mode preferred
by the intermediary depending on the magnitude of
the order-fulfillment cost.
PROPOSITION 5. When the market competition intensity
is relatively small (i.e., c \ c jF¼0 ), there exists two
thresholds F > 0 and F (≥F ) such that:

•
•
•

when F ≤ F , the preferred mode is PP; and
when F < F ≤ F , the preferred mode is PR; and
when F > F , the preferred mode is RR.

Proposition 5 shows that the magnitude of the
order-fulfillment cost will alter the mode choices.
When the market competition intensity is relatively
low (c \ c jF¼0 ), as the order-fulfillment cost
increases, the equilibrium mode will evolve from a
pure marketplace mode to a hybrid mode then to a
pure reseller mode. The intuition of this result lies in
the fact that the higher the order-fulfillment cost
becomes, the more difficult it becomes for the intermediary to convince the suppliers to adopt the marketplace mode and endure the order-fulfillment cost.
Recall that both aPR and aPP decrease in F. That is, as
the order-fulfillment cost increases, the intermediary
has to set a much lower proportional fee to ensure
that the suppliers will accept the marketplace offer.
This becomes increasingly expensive as the order-fulfillment cost increases. As a result, the intermediary
prefers the marketplace mode for both suppliers
when the order-fulfillment cost is low and favors the
reseller mode when the order-fulfillment cost is
significant.
From a practical perspective, we observe that most
hotel and airline companies use the PP mode on travel sites such as Expedia, Travelocity, Ctrip, and
Qunar (Ctrip and Qunar are leading travel sites in
China). This is partially driven by the low (almost
negligible) order-fulfillment cost for electronic tickets/bookings. In the publishing industry, a transition
to the PP mode from the RR mode is evident for ebooks while the RR mode is still preferred for print
books. This could be due in part to the fact that orderfulfillment costs are greater for printed books as compared to e-books.
Having analytically examined the impacts of the
competition intensity and order-fulfillment cost individually, we next numerically illustrate how the interactions between these two parameters affect the mode
choice for the intermediary. Figure 2 was generated
by setting h = 10 (i.e., the market potential equals to
10) and pO = 0 (i.e., the outside option facing the
supplier is 0). Then we simultaneously vary
F (F 2 ð0; FPP jc¼0 Þ, where FPP jc¼0 ¼ 12:5) and c
(c 2 (0, 2)). Note that our results are robust to the
parameter changes.

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model
Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

Figure 2 Preferred Mode: Interaction of F and c (h = 10, pO = 0)
[Color figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
2
1.8

RR

1.6
1.4

PR

γ

1.2
1
0.8
0.6

PP

0.4
0.2
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

F
From Figure 2, we first observe that for any given
order-fulfillment cost, increasing levels of competition intensity (i.e., c) results in a transition from
mode PP to mode PR and then to mode RR as intermediary’s preferred mode choice. Second, when the
market competition intensity is relatively low (i.e.,
c  c jF¼0 ), as the order-fulfillment cost increases, the
equilibrium mode will evolve from mode PP to
mode PR and then mode RR. Third, when the market competition intensity is in a medium range (i.e.,
c jF¼0 \ c \ c jF¼0 ), the preferred transition is
between modes PR and RR as the order-fulfillment
cost increases. In addition, when the market competition intensity is relatively high (i.e., c  c jF¼0 ), then
the reseller mode RR will dominate as the preferred
mode choice. The intuition behind these results
hinges on the trade-off between the transfer of control rights for product pricing and the responsibility
for order fulfillment. The results here provide executable managerial insights to the online platforms.
Specifically, if competition intensity is low and the
order-fulfillment cost is not too high, then the intermediary should specify a relatively low proportional
fee a to induce suppliers to switch to mode PP. As
both competition intensity and order-fulfillment
costs increase, the intermediary should increase the
proportional fee a to motivate some supplier switching. Finally, when both competition intensity and
order-fulfillment cost are high, then the proportional
fee a should be set to a large value to discourage the
suppliers from switching to the online marketplace
mode.
5.3. Supplier Profitability
It is straightforward to show that if the intermediary
sets the referral proportion a such that a  12, then for
both suppliers, mode RR always optimizes their own
profitability. It is only when a \ 12 that supplier
choices are moderated by the order-fulfillment cost F,

1605

the referral proportion a, and the level of competition
intensity c.
More specifically, assume that the supplier terms
are such that F ≤ FPP and a = aPP so that mode PP is
now a feasible alternative. In this case, the choice of
both suppliers to move to the online marketplace
mode PP from the reseller mode RR is dependent
upon the level of competition intensity such that: (a)
under low levels of competition intensity, both suppliers’ profits are larger under mode RR, and (b)
under high levels of competition intensity, the reverse
is true. These results indicate that regardless of the
terms offered by the intermediary through the referral
proportion a, the exogenous market parameter c will
affect whether suppliers are better or worse off under
mode PP or mode RR. Hence, from a managerial perspective, it is relevant to not only evaluate the intermediary’s terms for the online marketplace mode but
also to examine the intensity of competition within a
product category.
Assume that F ≤ FPR and a = aPR so that mode PR
is a feasible alternative. The supplier choosing the
online marketplace service would realize higher profits under mode PR as compared to mode RR, while
we observe that the supplier operating under the reseller mode (i.e., the supplier who is not offered the
option of online marketplace by the intermediary)
would realize lower profits in mode PR as compared
to mode RR. Without the alleviation of the doublemarginalization effect, Supplier A (who chooses the
online marketplace mode) will decrease the retail
price of its product to attract consumers, which leads
to a reduction in the total demand for the other supplier (i.e., B). Although Supplier B attempts to alleviate this demand reduction with a relative price
decrease to enhance profitability, the net impact does
not result in a larger profit for this supplier as compared to when both suppliers operate as resellers (i.e.,
mode RR). Managerially, this reflects a “first mover”
advantage for suppliers. As soon as the intermediary
offers a reduction in the referral proportion a and sets
a = aPR, the first supplier to choose to switch to the
online marketplace service would be the one who
reaps the gains from this mode of operation. Note that
the competition intensity parameter c does not moderate this finding.
5.4. Supply Chain Profits
Our next focus is on total supply chain profits (i.e., the
sum of both the suppliers’ profits and the intermediary’s profit) across the three modes. The fulfillment
cost parameter is irrelevant in terms of this comparison and hence we set F = 0. Figure 3 illustrates the
total supply chain profits as a function of the competition intensity parameter c (the maximum market size
h = 10 and the outside option profit pO = 0). When

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model

1606

Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

Figure 3 The Supply Chain Profit under Different Modes (h = 10,
pO = 0, F = 0) [Color figure can be viewed at wileyonline
library.com]
50

The supply chain profit

48
46
44
42
RR
PR
PP

40
38
36

0

0.5

1
1.5
The competition intensity: γ

2

competition intensity is low, total supply chain profits
are at a maximum under mode PP; at the other
extreme, when competition intensity is high, total
supply chain profits are at a maximum under mode
RR. It is only when competition intensity is the middle range that mode PR leads to maximum supply
chain profits. The driver of these results is the tradeoff between the alleviation of the double-marginalization effect and price competition.

Table 2 The Percentage of the Reseller Mode Used on JD.COM
Household appliance
Electric kettle
1.1 L and below
–
17.7%
Multi-role pot
2–4 L
–
13.5%
Water heater
60 L and below
–
Egg boilers
–
Yogurt maker

10.4%
5 below
19.0%
500 ml

25.0%
5–10
28.4%
800–1000

–
Cleaning products
Cloth cleaning
–
Home cleaning
–
Skin care

11.8%

14.5%

1.5 above
48.1%
6 above
47.1%
80 and
above
31.3%
10 above
35.3%
1200 and
above
56.3%

0–1 kg
29.2%
500 ml below
3.5%
100 ml below

1–3
32.4%
500–1000
4.3%
100–199

3 above
41.2%
1000 above
6.9%
200–399

4.4%

4.3%

6.7%

1 kg and below
5.8%

1–5
9.9%

5 above
12.7%

8 inch below
13.6%
13 inch below

8–10
41.8%
13–15

10 above
44.8%
15 above

2.7%

10.5%

12.8%

–
Food
Rice grains
–
Digital products
Student tablet
–
Laptop
computer
–

1.2–1.5
42.6%
4–6
22.6%
60–79

400 and
above
7.8%

Source: Data collected from JD.com during March 2015.

5.5. Anecdotal Evidence
Since fulfillment costs (F) are related to inventory,
storage, and transportation, it is reasonable to assume
that “larger” products (in terms of weight and/or
size) would lead to higher fulfillment costs. Given our
results that higher fulfillment costs would lead to a
stronger preference for the reseller mode (RR), we
provide limited anecdotal evidence that these results
hold in practice.
JD.com is one of the largest B2C online retailers in
the world with annual sales around $23 billion. We
focus our attention on a few product categories (e.g.,
cleaning products, household appliances, food, and
digital products) sold on JD.com during March 2015.
For each product category, the percentage of suppliers operating in a reseller mode (RR) is shown in
Table 2. This Table shows that for each individual
product, as product size/weight increases, the percentage of the reseller mode being adopted increases.
Given that fulfillment costs would be higher for products with higher weight and/or larger size, this data
provides validity to our results on the impact of
order-fulfillment cost.
It is also interesting to note that there are significant
differences in the percentage of suppliers who choose
the reseller mode (RR) within and across product categories. For example, comparing the food/oil category to the household appliance category, we see that

a significantly larger percentage of suppliers choose
the reseller mode in the latter category as compared
to the former. One explanation for this is that consumers might consider products within the household
appliances category as being more homogeneous compared to products within the food/oil category. Since
this would imply higher competition intensity for
products in the household appliances category as compared to products in the food/oil category, it is preferable for suppliers to choose the reseller mode in the
latter category and the online marketplace mode in the
former category.
Finally, there are also differences for individual
products within a product category. As product size
and/or weight increases for both student tablets and
laptop computers, a greater percentage of suppliers
choose to operate under the reseller mode. These percentages are significantly different across the individual products. As we explored earlier, these differences
could stem from differences in product differentiation
(or competition intensity) for individual products
within a product category; that is, lower fulfillment
costs coupled with lower product differentiation
(or higher competition intensity) leads to a higher percentage of suppliers choosing the reseller mode for student tablets as compared to lower fulfillment costs

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model
Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

coupled with higher product differentiation (or lower
competition intensity) for laptop computers.
5.6. Variable vs. Fixed Order-Fulfillment Cost
Since customers are often responsible for delivery
costs in online shopping, we normalize the variable
cost of the order fulfillment to zero and focus on the
fixed cost in our base model. It could be argued that
variable order-fulfillment costs are proportional to
market demand and hence, instead of fixed fulfillment costs, we should incorporate them into our analysis. When we do so, the results do not lead to any
changes in our key insights. The primary reason for
this is that variable order-fulfillment costs not only
influence pricing decisions but also affect proportional fees in the equilibrium. Thus, they affect the
results in a similar qualitative manner as fixed orderfulfillment costs. In particular, a higher (lower) variable order-fulfillment cost results in higher (lower)
market prices. With a higher market price the supplier is less likely to accept the intermediary’s marketplace offer with the same proportional fee rate,
making the pure reseller mode more likely to emerge
as an equilibrium choice. Since the focus of our study
is on the strategic interactions between the online
intermediary and the suppliers in mode choice, rather
than on pricing strategy, a positive variable order-fulfillment cost only leads to more analytical complexity
without yielding additional insights into our research
questions. This is the rationale for choosing to incorporate fixed rather than variable fulfillment costs in
our model.
5.7. Asymmetric Order-Fulfillment Costs or
Market Potentials
Our analysis so far has assumed symmetric suppliers
in terms of order fulfillments costs and market potentials. For the case of asymmetries in these parameters,
we find that our key results and qualitative insights
still hold. There are some interesting new insights that
emerge from this investigation which are both related
to the hybrid mode PR (details are provided in the
Online Appendix).
First, the intermediary should offer the online marketplace option to the supplier with the lower relative
order-fulfillment cost. This result is driven by the fact
that the sufficient condition stated in Proposition 1 for
the order-fulfillment cost is easier to achieve when the
online marketplace offer is made to the supplier with
the lower cost. Second, if the two suppliers have different market potentials, it is always optimal for the
intermediary to provide and convince the supplier
with higher market potential to accept the online marketplace offer. The proportional fee is a form of
revenue sharing and hence, can mitigate doublemarginalization effects (Geng et al. 2018, Tan and

1607

Carrillo 2017). A higher market potential induces a
larger loss due to double-marginalization, and thus,
by offering the online marketplace option to the supplier with a higher market potential, this loss can be
reduced. This finding is consistent with industry
practice. For example, Walmart Marketplace is invitation-only. They claim that “We are looking for relationships with reputable retailers and brands that
provide first-class customer service, a compelling product assortment, competitive pricing and fast, reliable
fulfillment.”9

6. Conclusions and Discussions
A relatively new mode of operation for online intermediaries is the “online marketplace.” Under this mode,
the online intermediary offers an option to suppliers:
The intermediary can act as a reseller of the suppliers’
products, or let the suppliers to operate as independent suppliers on the intermediary platform; that is,
the intermediary simply acts as an “online marketplace.” In this study, we have provided insights into
the key aspects that moderate the decision of an intermediary to operate as a reseller, operate as an online
marketplace, or adopt a hybrid mode of operation.
Previous research has indicated that the online marketplace is always the preferred option for supply
chain members, since it reduces the double marginalization impact and thus increases profits for all members. We show that this is not necessarily the case.
Instead, we note that the degree of competition intensity and magnitude of order-fulfillment cost moderate
the preference regions within which distinct modes
are preferred by the online intermediary. For given
fulfillment costs: (a) high levels of competition intensity lead to the intermediary preferring the reseller
mode, (b) moderate levels of competition intensity
lead to a preference for the hybrid mode, and (c) at
low levels of competition intensity, the preferred
mode is the online marketplace. The key intuition
behind this finding is the moderating role of the intermediary. Similarly, for a given level of competition
intensity, we show that: (a) when order-fulfillment
costs are low, the marketplace mode is the preferred
choice, (b) moderate levels of order-fulfillment costs
lead to the choice of the hybrid mode, and (c) the
reseller mode is preferred when order-fulfillment
costs are high.
We also find that a non-trivial interaction effect
between the degree of competition intensity and the
magnitude of fulfillment costs affects optimal mode
choice for the intermediary. For example, the threshold order-fulfillment costs for the intermediary to
switch from a marketplace to a hybrid mode or from
a hybrid to a reseller mode decreases as competition
intensity increases. Similarly, the threshold level of

1608

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model
Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

competition intensity for the intermediary to switch
from a marketplace to a hybrid mode or from a hybrid
to a reseller mode decreases as fulfillment costs
increase. Through data collected from one online
intermediary, we also provide some face validity for
our findings. Finally, these key insights hold regardless of whether the order fulfillments costs are fixed
(as our analysis assumes) or are variable and demand
dependent.
From a practical perspective, online retailers should
consider providing the online marketplace option for
product categories in which the competition among
different suppliers is not intense, while adopting the
traditional reseller mode for highly competitive products. An alternative is to discriminate between sellers
across different product categories by using distinct
revenue sharing proportions. For highly competitive
product categories, the online intermediary can
demand a higher proportional fee while charging a
lower fee for the sellers in the long-tail product categories. Also, if the related order-fulfillment cost is
very high, even when the competition is not intense,
the online intermediary can still leverage the reseller
mode to improve profitability.
We conclude the paper by pointing out a few
caveats about our model and some directions for
future research. First, we have assumed that the supplier’s profit stemming from the outside option is not
very high. If a supplier’s profit under the outside
option is very high, the supplier will choose to leave
the intermediary and pursue the outside option. Consequently, the original operating modes will no
longer exist and we will have a monopoly case. Existing literature (Hao and Fan 2014, Tan and Carrillo
2017) have studied the monopoly case and showed
that the marketplace mode always dominates the
reseller mode due to the revenue sharing structure in
the marketplace mode. The focus of our paper is to
illustrate how upstream competition and order-fulfillment cost can alter the existing results and provide
unique managerial insights into the online intermediary managers. For this reason, the monopoly case is
not as pertinent as the competitive case. In summary,
to focus on the more relevant and realistic competitive
case, we assume that the outside option is not the preferred choice for the suppliers.
Second, in practice, many major suppliers and
brand owners introduce their own direct-sale websites in addition to selling through popular online
retailing platforms. In such situations, the supplier’s
decision within its separate online store will interact
with the selling mode (i.e., reseller or marketplace)
and also the price in the online retailing platform.
That is, there will be cross-channel effects. How will
the two channels interact with each other? How will
their interactions influence the suppliers’ and the

intermediary’s preferences on selling modes and the
corresponding pricing decisions? Ryan et al. (2012)
and Abhishek et al. (2016) have provided some
insights, but further studies are required. We leave it
for future research to explicitly examine the effect of
cross-channel effects on the mode choice for online
intermediaries. Additionally, note that there are also a
few large-scale suppliers/brand owners who do not
sell through online retailing platforms. For example,
Apple sells computers and accessories on Amazon,
but it does not sell iPhones on Amazon. We find some
anecdotal evidence regarding why certain companies
(e.g., Apple) choose not to sell on the third-party
online marketplaces.10 Essentially it is due to competition, as Amazon itself also provides many competing products at the same time. Although our model
cannot directly explain this rationale, we think this
is also a promising research question for future
scholars.
Third, our analysis and expositions have focused
on the emerging online marketplace. In reality, there
exists offline store-within-store models. The most typical and representative example is the consignment
store, where the seller displays products in the store
and shares the revenue with the product owners.
Though our research resonates with such settings,
there are some subtle but important differences with
online marketplaces. To begin with, typically it is the
consignment shop, not the product owner, who sets
prices. Second, unlike the online marketplace, consignment shops typically sell second-hand and vintage products. Third, the revenue sharing contract is
difficult to implement in the offline setting as pointed
out by Cachon and Lariviere (2005). The marketplace
idea is applicable to an offline setting, but it is not as
popular as the online marketplace. Finally, a consignment store’s reach is limited by consumer proximity.
All these reasons might explain why consignment
stores do not proliferate in practice.
Extensions of our work that may be of interest
would be to capture other factors, such as complementary markets, asymmetric information and economies
of scale of order-fulfillment cost, in addition to competition intensity and order-fulfillment cost. Another
possible avenue would be to investigate the optimal
mode choice not only in the case of supplier competition, but also integrating downstream competition
where buyers might be in direct competition with
one another. Finally, although we have confirmed
that our findings are consistent with practical observations, our research poses some testable empirical
questions. Our hope is that, as this body of literature expands in scope, many other related research
issues will be investigated with a view to furthering
our understanding of the efficacy of online
marketplaces.

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model
Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

1609

6

Acknowledgments
The authors contributed equally to this work. The authors
thank the department editor, the senior editor, and two
anonymous reviewers for their valuable suggestions that
have significantly improved this study. They also thank
Fuqiang Zhang, Baojun Jiang, and Qingning Cao for comments on earlier versions of the study. This research is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (grants 71702093, 71531005, and 71431004).

Notes
1
http://www.businesswire. com/news/home/20160614006063/
en/Products-Amazon-Carry-Categories (accessed date May
10, 2016).
2
Note that our linear demand functions can be derived
from the maximization problem of a representative consumer with a quadratic and strictly concave utility function which is defined in Singh and Vives (1984):

ð/d2 þ 2wd d þ /d2 Þ2

a b
b
Uðda ; db Þ ¼ hda þ hdb  a
, where / ¼ 11þþ2cc ,
2
c
w ¼ 1 þ 2c, and di is the amount of product i. In specific,
the
representative
consumer
maximizes
U
(da, db)  pada  pbdb, where pi is the price of product i.
Please refer to Singh and Vives (1984) for detailed clarifications and analysis.
3
It is trivial to show that these demand functions satisfy
the regularity properties for product substitutes. The ratio
of price elasticity of demand for a supplier’s own product
offering is greater than the price elasticity of demand for
the substitute product offering since 1 + c > c. Note c has
an alternative interpretation, which is product differentiation. If consumers perceive that products are highly differentiated (i.e., low competition intensity), then the value of
c is low and vice versa.
4
In our extension, we have illustrated that the impact of a
variable cost for order fulfillment is very similar to the
impact of a fixed order-fulfillment cost. When the marginal order-fulfillment cost is relatively small or moderate,
our main results remain the same; when the marginal
order-fulfillment cost becomes much higher, the results
become similar to the case in which there is a very large
fixed order-fulfillment cost.
5
For mode RR (i.e., the intermediary choosing to act as a
reseller for both suppliers), our entire analysis is based on
assuming that there are no economies of scale in order fulfillment costs realized by the intermediary. If such economies do exist then these can be integrated by assuming
total fulfillment costs under mode RR equal bF with
(1 ≤ b < 2). Since order fulfillment costs have no impact
on the equilibrium wholesale and market prices (and
hence, realized demands) for both suppliers, then the only
impact would be on the corresponding optimal profits of
the intermediary under mode RR which would increase
by (2  b)F. Hence, integrating economies of scale in
order fulfillment costs would not change our insights substantively except that there would be changes in the preference regions for the three strategy choices with the
preference regions for mode RR increasing and the preference regions for PR and PP would decline.

Note that we have implicitly assumed that the two
suppliers are symmetric for both order-fulfillment cost
(e.g., FS) and the market potential(e.g., h). The analysis
and results of asymmetric cases are discussed in section
5.7.
7
O
Although one may argue that the condition pPR
B  p
seems restrictive, it not only reflects real-world practice
(i.e., for certain products, some suppliers choose to operate under the reseller mode while others choose the online
marketplace option) but also market conditions. By selling
through an intermediary, suppliers can ensure access to a
larger customer base, and at the same time, offer their customers the benefit of an integrated shopping experience,
using the intermediary platform. Thus, in a competitive
setting, a supplier could choose to operate under the reseller mode even though its competitor chooses an alternative mode.
8
The reason to focus on the intermediary’s profit rather
than suppliers’ profits is that the intermediary can directly
control the channel mode by structuring the terms of the
online marketplace service. Suppliers, on the other hand,
are assumed to make rational choices based on these
terms and hence, play a passive role in the process.
9
https://marketplace.walmart.com/FAQ (accessed date
May 10, 2017).
10
https://www.cnet.com/news/why-doesnt-amazon-selliphones (accessed date October 10, 2017).

References
Abhishek, V., K. Jerath, Z. J. Zhang. 2016. To platform-sell or
resell? Channel structures in electronic retailing. Management
Sci. 62(8): 2259–2280.
Agatz, N. A. H., M. Fleischmann, J. van Nunen. 2008. E-fulfillment and multi-channel distribution: A review. Eur. J. Oper.
Res. 187(2): 339–356.
Birge, J. R., J. Drogosz, I. Duenyas. 1998. Setting single-period
optimal capacity levels and prices for substitutable products.
Int. J. Flex. Manuf. Syst. 10(4): 407–430.
Brynjolfsson E., J. Hu, M. S. Rahman. 2009. Battle of the retail
channels: How product selection and geography drive crosschannel competition. Management Sci. 55(11): 1755–1765.
Cachon, G., M. Lariviere. 2005. Supply chain coordination with
revenue-sharing contracts: Strengths and limitations. Management Sci. 51(1): 30–44.
Cai, G. 2010. Channel selection and coordination in dual-channel
supply chains. J. Retail. 86(1): 22–36.
Cai, G., Y. Dai, S. X. Zhou. 2012. Exclusive channels and revenue
sharing in a complementary goods market. Market. Sci. 31(1):
172–187.
Cattani, K. D., W. G. Gilland, J. Swaminathan. 2004. Coordinating
traditional and internet supply chains. International Series in
Operations Research and Management Science. D SimchiLevi, D. Wu, M. Shen, eds. Modeling in the EBusiness Era.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA, 643–677.
Chiang, W. K., D. Chhajed, J. D. Hess. 2003. Direct marketing,
indirect profits: A strategic analysis of dual-channel supplychain design. Management Sci. 49(1): 1–20.
Choi, S. C. 1991. Price competition in a channel structure with a
common retailer. Market. Sci. 10(4): 271–296.
Coughlan, A. T. 1985. Competition and cooperation in marketing
channel choice: Theory and application. Market. Sci. 4(22):
110–129.

1610

Tian, Vakharia, Tan, and Xu: Strategic Analysis of an E-Commerce Model
Production and Operations Management 27(8), pp. 1595–1610, © 2018 Production and Operations Management Society

Gal-Or, E., T. Geylani, A. Dukes. 2008. Information sharing in a
channel with partially informed retailers. Market. Sci. 27(4):
642–658.
Garcia-Gallego, A., N. Georgantzis. 2001. Multiproduct activity in
an experimental differentiated oligopoly. Int. J. Ind. Organ.
19(3–4): 493–518.

Shy, O., Z. Wang. 2011. Why do payment card networks charge
proportional fees? Am. Econ. Rev. 101(4): 1575–1590.
Singh, N., X. Vives. 1984. Price and quantity competition in a differentiated duopoly. RAND J. Econ. 15(4): 546–554.
Tan, Y., J. Carrillo. 2017. Strategic analysis of the agency model
for digital goods. Prod. Oper. Manag. 26(4): 724–741.

Geng, X., Y. Tan, L. Wei. 2018. How add-on pricing interacts with
distribution contracts. Prod. Oper. Manag. 27(4): 605–623.

Tan, Y., J. Carrillo, H. Cheng. 2016. The agency model for digital
goods. Decis. Sci. 47(4): 628–660.

Hagiu, A. 2007. Merchant or two-sided platform? Rev. Netw. Econ.
6(2): 115–133.

Trivedi, M. 1998. Distribution channels: An extension of exclusive
retailership. Management Sci. 44(7): 896–909.

Hagiu, A., J. Wright. 2015. Marketplace or reseller? Management
Sci. 61(1): 184–203.

Tsay, A. A., N. Agrawal. 2004a. Channel conflict and coordination
in the e-commerce age. Prod. Oper. Manag. 13(1): 93–110.

Hao, L., M. Fan. 2014. An analysis of pricing models in the electronic book market. MIS Q. 38(4): 1017–1032.
Jerath, K., Z. J. Zhang. 2010. Store within a store. J. Mark. Res.
47(4): 748–763.

Tsay, A. A., N. Agrawal. 2004b. Modeling conflict and coordination in multi-channel distribution systems: A review. International Series in Operations Research and Management
Science. D. Simchi-Levi, D. Wu, M. Shen, eds. Modeling in
the EBusiness Era, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, MA,
557–606.

Jiang, B., K. Jerath, K. Srinivasan. 2011. Firm strategies in the “Mid
Tail” of platform-based retailing. Market. Sci. 30(5): 757–775.
Kapner, S. 2014. How the web drags on some retailers. The Wall
Street Journal. Available at http://www.wsj.com/articles/
how-the-web-drags-on-some-retailers-1417477790 (accessed date
November 30, 2015).
Li, L., H. Zhang. 2008. Confidentiality and information sharing
in supply chain coordination. Management Sci. 54(8):
1467–1481.
McGuire, T. W., R. Staelin. 1983. An industry equilibrium analysis
of downstream vertical integration. Market. Sci. 2(2): 161–191.
Netemeyer, R. G., C. M. Heilman, J. G. Maxham III. 2012. The
impact of a new retail brand in-store boutique and its perceived fit with the parent retail brand on store performance
and customer spending. J. Retail. 88(4): 462–475.
Ryan, J. K., D. Sun, X. Zhao. 2012. Competition and coordination
in online marketplaces. Prod. Oper. Manag. 21(6):997–1014.

Wang, J., H. Shin. 2015. The impact of contracts and competition
on upstream innovation in a supply chain. Prod. Oper. Manag.
24(1): 134–146.
Young, K., J. Chen, S. Raghunathan. 2014. Online product
reviews: Implications for retailers and competing manufacturers. Inf. Syst. Res. 25(1): 93–110.

Supporting Information
Additional supporting information may be found online
in the Supporting Information section at the end of the
article.
Appendix S1: Proofs of Lemmas and Propositions.
Appendix S2: Analysis for Asymmetric Cases.

